
June 2, 1910
When the shadow of the sash appeared on the curtains it was between
seven and eight oclock and then I was in time again, hearing the watch. It
was Grandfather's and when Father gave it to me he said I give you the
mausoleum of all hope and desire; it's rather excruciating-ly apt that you
will use it to gain the reducto absurdum of all human experience which can
fit your individual needs no better than it fitted his or his father's. I give it
to you not that you may remember time, but that you might forget it now
and then for a moment and not spend all your breath trying to conquer it.
Because no battle is ever won he said. They are not even fought. The field
only reveals to man his own folly and despair, and victory is an illusion of
philosophers and fools.
 It was propped against the collar box and I lay listening to it. Hearing it,
that is. I dont suppose anybody ever deliberately listens to a watch or a
clock. You dont have to. You can be oblivious to the sound for a long while,
then in a second of ticking it can create in the mind unbroken the long
diminishing parade of time you didn't hear. Like Father said down the long
and lonely light-rays you might see Jesus walking, like. And the good Saint
Francis that said Little Sister Death, that never had a sister.
 Through the wall I heard Shreve's bed-springs and then his slippers on
the floor hishing. I got up and went to the dresser and slid my hand along it
and touched the watch and turned it face-down and went back to bed. But
the shadow of the sash was still there and I had learned to tell almost to the
minute, so I'd have to turn my back to it, feeling the eyes animals used to
have in the back of their heads when it was on top, itching. It's always the
idle habits you acquire which you will regret. Father said that. That Christ
was not crucified: he was worn away by a minute clicking of little wheels.
That had no sister.
 And so as soon as I knew I couldn't see it, I began to wonder what time it
was. Father said that constant speculation regarding the position of
mechanical hands on an arbitrary dial which is a symptom of mindfunction. Excrement Father said like sweating. And I saying All right.
Wonder. Go on and wonder.
 If it had been cloudy I could have looked at the window, thinking what
he said about idle habits. Thinking it would be nice for them down at New
London if the weather held up like this. Why shouldn't it? The month of
brides, the voice that breathed She ran right out of the mirror, out of the
banked scent. Roses. Roses. Mr and Mrs Jason Richmond Compson
announce the marriage of. Roses. Not virgins like dogwood, milkweed. I
said I have committed incest, Father I said. Roses. Cunning and serene. If
you attend Harvard one year, but dont see the boat-race, there should be a
refund. Let Jason have it. Give Jason a year at Harvard.
 Shreve stood in the door, putting his collar on, his glasses glinting rosily,
as though he had washed them with his face. "You taking a cut this
morning?"
 "Is it that late?"
 He looked at his watch. "Bell in two minutes."
 "I didn't know it was that late." He was still looking at the watch, his
mouth shaping. "I'll have to hustle. I cant stand another cut. The dean told
me last week--" He put the watch back into his pocket. Then I quit talking.
 "You'd better slip on your pants and run," he said. He went out.
 I got up and moved about, listening to him through the wall. He entered
the sitting-room, toward the door.
 "Aren't you ready yet?"
 "Not yet. Run along. I'll make it."
 He went out. The door closed. His feet went down the corridor. Then I
could hear the watch again. I quit moving around and went to the window
and drew the curtains aside and watched them running for chapel, the
same ones fighting the same heaving coat-sleeves, the same books and
flapping collars flushing past like debris on a flood, and Spoade. Calling
Shreve my husband. Ah let him alone, Shreve said, if he's got better sense
than to chase after the little dirty sluts, whose business. In the South you
are ashamed of being a virgin. Boys. Men. They lie about it. Because it
means less to women, Father said. He said it was men invented virginity
not women. Father said it's like death: only a state in which the others are
left and I said, But to believe it doesn't matter and he said, That's what's so
sad about anything: not only virginity and I said, Why couldn't it have been
me and not her who is unvirgin and he said, That's why that's sad too;
nothing is even worth the changing of it, and Shreve said if he's got better
sense than to chase after the little dirty sluts and I said Did you ever have a
sister? Did you? Did you?
 Spoade was in the middle of them like a terrapin in a street full of
scuttering dead leaves, his collar about his ears, moving at his customary
unhurried walk. He was from South Carolina, a senior. It was his club's
boast that he never ran for chapel and had never got there on time and had
never been absent in four years and had never made either chapel or first
lecture with a shirt on his back and socks on his feet. About ten oclock he'd
come in Thompson's, get two cups of coffee, sit down and take his socks
out of his pocket and remove his shoes and put them on while the coffee
cooled. About noon you'd see him with a shirt and collar on, like anybody
else. The others passed him running, but he never increased his pace at all.
After a while the quad was empty.
 A sparrow slanted across the sunlight, onto the window ledge, and
cocked his head at me. His eye was round and bright. First he'd watch me
with one eye, then flick! and it would be the other one, his throat pumping
faster than any pulse. The hour began to strike. The sparrow quit swapping
eyes and watched me steadily with the same one until the chimes ceased,
as if he were listening too. Then he flicked off the ledge and was gone.
 It was a while before the last stroke ceased vibrating. It stayed in the air,
more felt than heard, for a long time. Like all the bells that ever rang still
ringing in the long dying light-rays and Jesus and Saint Francis talking
about his sister. Because if it were just to hell; if that were all of it.
Finished. If things just finished themselves. Nobody else there but her and
me. If we could just have done something so dreadful that they would have
fled hell except us. I have committed incest I said Father it was I it was
not Dalton Ames And when he put Dalton Ames. Dalton Ames. Dalton
Ames. When he put the pistol in my hand I didn't. That's why I didn't. He
would be there and she would and I would. Dalton Ames. Dalton Ames.
Dalton Ames. If we could have just done something so dreadful and Father
said That's sad too people cannot do anything that dreadful they cannot do
anything very dreadful at all they cannot even remember tomorrow what
seemed dreadful today and I said, You can shirk all things and he said, Ah
can you. And I will look down and see my murmuring bones and the deep
water like wind, like a roof of wind, and after a long time they cannot
distinguish even bones upon the lonely and inviolate sand. Until on the
Day when He says Rise only the flat-iron would come floating up. It's not
when you realise that nothing can help you--religion, pride, anything--it's
when you realise that you dont need any aid. Dalton Ames. Dalton Ames.
Dalton Ames. If I could have been his mother lying with open body lifted
laughing, holding his father with my hand refraining, seeing, watching him
die before he lived. One minute she was standing in the door
 I went to the dresser and took up the watch, with the face still down. I
tapped the crystal on the corner of the dresser and caught the fragments of
glass in my hand and put them into the ashtray and twisted the hands off
and put them in the tray. The watch ticked on. I turned the face up, the
blank dial with little wheels clicking and click- ing behind it, not knowing
any better. Jesus walking on Galilee and Washington not telling lies.
Father brought back a watch-charm from the Saint Louis Fair to Jason: a
tiny opera glass into which you squinted with one eye and saw a
skyscraper, a ferris wheel all spidery, Niagara Falls on a pinhead. There
was a red smear on the dial. When I saw it my thumb began to smart. I put
the watch down and went into Shreve's room and got the iodine and
painted the cut. I cleaned the rest of the glass out of the rim with a towel.
 I laid out two suits of underwear, with socks, shirts, collars and ties, and
packed my trunk. I put in everything except my new suit and an old one
and two pairs of shoes and two hats, and my books. I carried the books into
the sitting-room and stacked them on the table, the ones I had brought
from home and the ones Father said it used to be a gentleman was
known by his books; nowadays he is known by the ones he has not
returned and locked the trunk and addressed it. The quarter hour
sounded. I stopped and listened to it until the chimes ceased.
 I bathed and shaved. The water made my finger smart a little, so I
painted it again. I put on my new suit and put my watch on and packed the
other suit and the accessories and my razor and brushes in my hand bag,
and folded the trunk key into a sheet of paper and put it in an envelope and
addressed it to Father, and wrote the two notes and sealed them.
 The shadow hadn't quite cleared the stoop. I stopped inside the door,
watching the shadow move. It moved almost perceptibly, creeping back
inside the door, driving the shadow back into the door. Only she was
running already when I heard it. In the mirror she was running before I
knew what it was. That quick her train caught up over her arm she ran
out of the mirror like a cloud, her veil swirling in long glints her heels
brittle and fast clutch ing her dress onto her shoulder with the other hand,
run ning out of the mirror the smells roses roses the voice that breathed
o'er Eden. Then she was across the porch I couldn't hear her heels then in
the moonlight like a cloud, the floating shadow of the veil running across
the grass, into the bellowing. She ran out of her dress, clutching her
bridal, running into the bellowing where T. P. in the dew Whooey
Sassprilluh Benjy under the box bellowing. Father had a V-shaped silver
cuirass on his running chest
 Shreve said, "Well, you didn't.... Is it a wedding or a wake?"
 "I couldn't make it," I said.
 "Not with all that primping. What's the matter? You think this was
Sunday?"
 "I reckon the police wont get me for wearing my new suit one time," I
said.
 "I was thinking about the Square students. They'll think you go to
Harvard. Have you got too proud to at tend classes too?"
 "I'm going to eat first." The shadow on the stoop was gone. I stepped
into sunlight, finding my shadow again. I walked down the steps just ahead
of it. The half hour went. Then the chimes ceased and died away.
 Deacon wasn't at the postoffice either. I stamped the two envelopes and
mailed the one to Father and put Shreve's in my inside pocket, and then I
remembered where I had last seen the Deacon. It was on Decoration Day,
in a G.A.R. uniform, in the middle of the parade. If you waited long enough
on any corner you would see him in whatever parade came along. The one
before was on Columbus' or Garibaldi's or somebody's birthday. He was in
the Street Sweepers' section, in a stovepipe hat, carrying a two inch Italian
flag, smoking a cigar among the brooms and scoops. But the last time was
the G.A.R. one, because Shreve said:
 "There now. Just look at what your grandpa did to that poor old
nigger."
 "Yes," I said. "Now he can spend day after day marching in parades. If it
hadn't been for my grandfather, he'd have to work like whitefolks."
 I didn't see him anywhere. But I never knew even a working nigger that
you could find when you wanted him, let alone one that lived off the fat of
the land. A car came along. I went over to town and went to Parker's and
had a good breakfast. While I was eating I heard a clock strike the hour.
But then I suppose it takes at least one hour to lose time in, who has been
longer than history getting into the mechanical progression of it.
 When I finished breakfast I bought a cigar. The girl said a fifty cent one
was the best, so I took one and lit it and went out to the street. I stood there
and took a couple of puffs, then I held it in my hand and went on toward
the corner. I passed a jeweller's window, but I looked away in time. At the
corner two bootblacks caught me, one on either side, shrill and raucous,
like blackbirds. I gave the cigar to one of them, and the other one a nickel.
Then they let me alone. The one with the cigar was trying to sell it to the
other for the nickel.
 There was a clock, high up in the sun, and I thought about how, when
you dont want to do a thing, your body will try to trick you into doing it,
sort of unawares. I could feel the muscles in the back of my neck, and then
I could hear my watch ticking away in my pocket and after a while I had all
the other sounds shut away, leaving only the watch in my pocket. I turned
back up the street, to the window. He was working at the table behind the
window. He was going bald. There was a glass in his eye--a metal tube
screwed into his face. I went in.
 The place was full of ticking, like crickets in September grass, and I
could hear a big clock on the wall above his head. He looked up, his eye big
and blurred and rushing beyond the glass. I took mine out and handed it to
him.
 "I broke my watch."
 He flipped it over in his hand. "I should say you have. You must have
stepped on it."
 "Yes, sir. I knocked it off the dresser and stepped on it in the dark. It's
still running though."
 He pried the back open and squinted into it. "Seems to be all right. I
cant tell until I go over it, though. I'll go into it this afternoon."
 "I'll bring it back later," I said. "Would you mind telling me if any of
those watches in the window are right?"
 He held my watch on his palm and looked up at me with his blurred
rushing eye.
 "I made a bet with a fellow," I said. "And I forgot my glasses this
morning."
 "Why, all right," he said. He laid the watch down and half rose on his
stool and looked over the barrier. Then he glanced up at the wall. "It's
twen--"
 "Dont tell me," I said, "please sir. Just tell me if any of them are right."
 He looked at me again. He sat back on the stool and pushed the glass up
onto his forehead. It left a red circle around his eye and when it was gone
his whole face looked naked. "What're you celebrating today?" he said.
"That boat race aint until next week, is it?"
 "No, sir. This is just a private celebration. Birthday. Are any of them
right?"
 "No. But they haven't been regulated and set yet. If you're thinking of
buying one of them—-"
 "No, sir. I dont need a watch. We have a clock in our sitting room. I'll
have this one fixed when I do." I reached my hand.
 "Better leave it now."
 "I'll bring it back later." He gave me the watch. I put it in my pocket. I
couldn't hear it now, above all the others. "I'm much obliged to you. I hope
I haven't taken up your time."
 "That's all right. Bring it in when you are ready. And you better put off
this celebration until after we win that boat race."
 "Yes, sir. I reckon I had."
 I went out, shutting the door upon the ticking. I looked back into the
window. He was watching me across the barrier. There were about a dozen
watches in the window, a dozen different hours and each with the same
assertive and contradictory assurance that mine had, without any hands at
all. Contradicting one another. I could hear mine, ticking away inside my
pocket, even though nobody could see it, even though it could tell nothing
if anyone could.
 And so I told myself to take that one. Because Father said clocks slay
time. He said time is dead as long as it is being clicked off by little wheels;
only when the clock stops does time come to life. The hands were extended,
slightly off the horizontal at a faint angle, like a gull tilting into the wind.
Holding all I used to be sorry about like the new moon holding water,
niggers say. The jeweller was working again, bent over his bench, the tube
tunnelled into his face. His hair was parted in the center. The part ran up
into the bald spot, like a drained marsh in December.
 I saw the hardware store from across the street. I didn't know you
bought flat-irons by the pound.
 "Maybe you want a tailor's goose," the clerk said. "They weigh ten
pounds." Only they were bigger than I thought. So I got two six-pound little
ones, because they would look like a pair of shoes wrapped up. They felt
heavy enough together, but I thought again how Father had said about the
reducto absurdum of human experience, thinking how the only
opportunity I seemed to have for the application of Harvard. Maybe by
next year; thinking maybe it takes two years in school to learn to do that
properly.
 But they felt heavy enough in the air. A car came. I got on. I didn't see
the placard on the front. It was full, mostly prosperous looking people
reading newspapers. The only vacant seat was beside a nigger. He wore a
derby and shined shoes and he was holding a dead cigar stub. I used to
think that a Southerner had to be always conscious of niggers. I thought
that Northerners would expect him to. When I first came East I kept
thinking You've got to remember to think of them as colored people not
niggers, and if it hadn't happened that I wasn't thrown with many of them,
I'd have wasted a lot of time and trouble before I learned that the best way
to take all people, black or white, is to take them for what they think they
are, then leave them alone. That was when I realisedthat a Digger is not a
person so much as a form of behavior; a sort of obverse reflection of the
white people he lives among. But I thought at first that I ought to miss
having a lot of them around me because I thought that Northerners
thought I did, but I didn't know that I really had missed Roskus and Dilsey
and them until that morning in Virginia. The train was stopped when I
waked and I raised the shade and looked out. The car was blocking a road
crossing, where two white fences came down a hill and then sprayed
outward and downward like part of the skeleton of a horn, and there was a
nigger on a mule in the middle of the stiff ruts, waiting for the train to
move. How long he had been there I didn't know, but he sat straddle of the
mule, his head wrapped in a piece of blanket, as if they had been built there
with the fence and the road, or with the hill, carved out of the hill itself, like
a sign put there saying You are home again. He didn't have a saddle and his
feet dangled almost to the ground. The mule looked like a rabbit. I raised
the window.
 "Hey, Uncle," I said. "Is this the way?"
 "Suh?" He looked at me, then he loosened the blanket and lifted it away
from his ear.
 "Christmas gift!" I said.
 "Sho comin, boss. You done caught me, aint you."
 "I'll let you off this time." I dragged my pants out of the little hammock
and got a quarter out. "But look out next time. I'll be coming back through
here two days after New Year, and look out then." I threw the quarter out
the window. "Buy yourself some Santy Claus."
 "Yes, suh," he said. He got down and picked up the quarter and rubbed
it on his leg. "Thanky, young marster. Thanky." Then the train began to
move. I leaned out the window, into the cold air, looking back. He stood
there beside the gaunt rabbit of a mule, the two of them shabby and
motionless and unimpatient. The train swung around the curve, the engine
puffing with short, heavy blasts, and they passed smoothly from sight that
way, with that quality about them of shabby and timeless patience, of static
serenity: that blending of childlike and ready incompetence and
paradoxical reliability that tends and protects them it loves out of all
reason and robs them steadily and evades responsibility and obligations by
means too barefaced to be called subterfuge even and is taken in theft or
evasion with only that frank and spontaneous admiration for the victor
which a gentleman feels for anyone who beats him in a fair contest, and
withal a fond and unflagging tolerance for whitefolks' vagaries like that of a
grandparent for unpredictable and troublesome children, which I had
forgotten. And all that day, while the train wound through rushing gaps
and along ledges where movement was only a laboring sound of the
exhaust and groaning wheels and the eternal mountains stood fading into
the thick sky, I thought of home, of the bleak station and the mud and the
niggers and country folks thronging slowly about the square, with toy
monkeys and wagons and candy in sacks and roman candles sticking out,
and my insides would move like they used to do in school when the bell
rang.
 I wouldn't begin counting until the clock struck three. Then I would
begin, counting to sixty and folding down one finger and thinking of the
other fourteen fingers waiting to be folded down, or thirteen or twelve or
eight or seven, until all of a sudden I'd realise silence and the unwinking
minds, and I'd say "Ma'am?" "Your name is Quentin, isn't it?" Miss Laura
would say. Then more silence and the cruel unwinking minds and hands
jerking into the silence. "Tell Quentin who discovered the Mississippi
River, Henry." "DeSoto." Then the minds would go away, and after a while
I'd be afraid I had gotten behind and I'd count fast and fold down another
finger, then I'd be afraid I was going too fast and I'd slow up, then I'd get
afraid and count fast again. So I never could come out even with the bell,
and the released surging of feet moving already, feeling earth in the scuffed
floor, and the day like a pane of glass struck a light, sharp blow, and my
insides would move, sitting still. Moving sitting still. My bowels moved for
thee. One minute she was standing in the door. Benjy. Bellowing.
Benjamin the child of mine old age bellowing. Caddy! Caddy!
 I'm going to run away. He began to cry she went and touched him.
Hush. I'm not going to. Hush. He hushed. Dilsey.
 He smell what you tell him when he want to. Dont have to listen nor
talk.
 Can he smell that new name they give him? Can he smell bad luck?
 What he want to worry about luck for? Luck cant do him no hurt.
 What they change his name for then if aint trying to help his luck?
 The car stopped, started, stopped again. Below the window I watched
the crowns of people's heads passing beneath new straw hats not yet
unbleached. There were women in the car now, with market baskets, and
men in work-clothes were beginning to outnumber the shined shoes and
collars.
 The nigger touched my knee. "Pardon me," he said. I swung my legs out
and let him pass. We were going beside a blank wall, the sound clattering
back into the car, at the women with market baskets on their knees and a
man in a stained hat with a pipe stuck in the band. I could smell water, and
in a break in the wall I saw a glint of water and two masts, and a gull
motionless in midair, like on an invisible wire between the masts, and I
raised my hand and through my coat touched the letters I had written.
When the car stopped I got off.
 The bridge was open to let a schooner through. She was in tow, the tug
nudging along under her quarter, trailing smoke, but the ship herself was
like she was moving without visible means. A man naked to the waist was
coiling down a line on the fo'c's'le head. His body was burned the color of
leaf tobacco. Another man in a straw hat withoutany crown was at the
wheel. The ship went through the bridge, moving under bare poles like a
ghost in broad day, with three gulls hovering above the stern like toys on
invisible wires.
 When it closed I crossed to the other side and leaned on the rail above
the boathouses. The float was empty and the doors were closed. Crew just
pulled in the late afternoon now, resting up before. The shadow of the
bridge, the tiers of railing, my shadow leaning flat upon the water, so easily
had I tricked it that would not quit me. At least fifty feet it was, and if I only
had something to blot it into the water, holding it until it was drowned, the
shadow of the package like two shoes wrapped up lying on the water.
Niggers say a drowned man's shadow was watching for him in the water all
the time. It twinkled and glinted, like breathing, the float slow like
breathing too, and debris half submerged, healing out to the sea and the
caverns and the grottoes of the sea. The displacement of water is equal to
the something of something. Reducto absurdum of all human experience,
and two six-pound flat-irons weigh more than one tailor's goose. What a
sinful waste Dilsey would say. Benjy knew it when Damuddy died. He
cried. He smell hit. He smell hit.
 The tug came back downstream, the water shearing in long rolling
cylinders, rocking the float at last with the echo of passage, the float
lurching onto the rolling cylinder with a plopping sound and a long jarring
noise as the door rolled back and two men emerged, carrying a shell. They
set it in the water and a moment later Bland came out, with the sculls. He
wore flannels, a gray jacket and a stiff straw hat. Either he or his mother
had read somewhere that Oxford students pulled in flannels and stiff hats,
so early one March they bought Gerald a one pair shell and in his flannels
and stiff hat he went on the river. The folks at the boathouse threatened to
call a policeman, but he went anyway. His mother came down in a hired
auto, in a fur suit like an arctic explorer's, and saw him off in a twenty-five
mile wind and a steady drove of ice floes like dirty sheep. Ever since then I
have believed that God is not only a gentleman and a sport; he is a
Kentuckian too. When he sailed away she made a detour and came down to
the river again and drove along parallel with him, the car in low gear. They
said you couldn't have told they'd ever seen one another before, like a King
and Queen, not even looking at one another, just moving side by side
across Massachusetts on parallel courses like a couple of planets.
 He got in and pulled away. He pulled pretty well now. He ought to. They
said his mother tried to make him give rowing up and do something else
the rest of his class couldn't or wouldn't do, but for once he was stubborn.
If you could call it stubbornness, sitting in his attitudes of princely
boredom, with his curly yellow hair and his violet eyes and his eyelashes
and his New York clothes, while his mamma was telling us about Gerald's
horses and Gerald's niggers and Gerald's women. Husbands and fathers in
Kentucky must have been awful glad when she carried Gerald off to
Cambridge. She had an apartment over in town, and Gerald had one there
too, besides his rooms in college. She approved of Gerald associating with
me because I at least revealed a blundering sense of noblesse oblige by
getting myself born below Mason and Dixon, and a few others whose
Geography met the requirements (minimum). Forgave, at least. Or
condoned. But since she met Spoade coming out of chapel one He said she
couldn't be a lady no lady would be out at that hour of the night she never
had been able to forgive him for having five names, including that of a
present English ducal house. I'm sure she solaced herself by being
convinced that some misfit Maingault or Mortemar had got mixed up with
the lodge-keeper's daughter. Which was quite probable, whether she
invented it or not. Spoade was the world's champion sitter-around, no
holds barred and gouging discretionary.
 The shell was a speck now, the oars catching the sun in spaced glints, as
if the hull were winking itself along him along. Did you ever have a sister,
No but they're all bitches. Did you ever have a sister? One minute she was.
Bitches. Not bitch one minute she stood in the door Dalton Ames. Dalton
Ames. Dalton Shirts. I thought all the time they were khaki, army issue
khaki, until I saw they were of heavy Chinese silk or finest flannel because
they made his face so brown his eyes so blue. Dalton Ames. It just missed
gentility. Theatrical fixture. Just papier-mache, then touch. Oh. Asbestos.
Not quite bronze. But wont see him at the house.
 Caddy's a woman too remember. She must do things for women's
reasons too.
 Why wont you bring him to the house, Caddy? Why must you do like
nigger women do in the pasture the ditches the dark woods hot hidden
furious in the dark woods.
 And after a while I had been hearing my watch for some time and I
could feel the letters crackle through my coat, against the railing, and I
leaned on the railing, watching my shadow, how I had tricked it. I moved
along the rail, but my suit was dark too and I could wipe my hands,
watching my shadow, how I had tricked it. I walked it into the shadow of
the quad. Then I went east.
 Harvard my Harvard boy Harvard harvard That pimple-faced infant
she met at the field-meet with colored ribbons. Skulking along the fence
trying to whistle her out like a puppy. Because they couldn't cajole him into
the diningroom Mother believed he had some sort of spell he was going to
cast on her when he got her alone. Yet any blackguard He was lying
beside the box under the window bellowing that could drive up in a
limousine with a flower in his buttonhole. Harvard. Quentin this is
Herbert. My Harvard boy. Herbert will be a big brother has already
promised Jason
 Hearty, celluloid like a drummer. Face full of teeth white but not
smiling. I've heard of him up there. All teeth but not smiling. You going to
drive?
 Get in Quentin.
 You going to drive.
 It's her car aren't you proud of your little sister owns first auto in town
Herbert his present. Louis has been giving her lessons every morning
didn't you get my letter Mr and Mrs Jason Richmond Compson
announce the marriage of their daughter Candace to Mr Sydney Herbert
Head on the twenty-fifth of April one thousand nine hundred and ten at
Jefferson Mississippi. At home after the first of August number Something
Something Avenue South Bend Indiana. Shreve said Aren't you even going
to open it? Three days. Times. Mr and Mrs Jason Richmond Compson
Young Lochinvar rode out of the west a little too soon, didn't he?
 I'm from the south. You're funny, aren't you.
 O yes I knew it was somewhere in the country.
 You're funny, aren't you. You ought to join the circus.
 I did. That's how I ruined my eyes watering the elephant's fleas. Three
times These country girls. You cant ever tell about them, can you. Well,
anyway Byron never had his wish, thank God. But not hit a man in
glasses Aren't you even going to open it? It lay on the table a candle
burning at each corner upon the envelope tied in a soiled pink garter two
artificial flowers. Not hit a man in glasses.
 Country people poor things they never saw an auto before lots of them
honk the horn Candace so She wouldn't look at me they'll get out of the
way wouldn't look at me your father wouldn't like it if you were to
injure one of them I'll declare your father will simply have to get an auto
now I'm almost sorry you brought it down Herbert I've enjoyed it so much
of course there's the carriage but so often when I'd like to go out Mr
Compson has the darkies doing something it would be worth my head to
interrupt he insists that Roskus is at my call all the time but I know what
that means I know how often people make promises just to satisfy their
consciences are you going to treat my little baby girl that way Herbert but I
know you wont Herbert has spoiled us all to death Quentin did I write you
that he is going to take Jason into his bank when Jason finishes high
school Jason will make a splendid banker he is the only one of my children
with any practical sense you can thank me for that he takes after my people
the others are all Compson Jason furnished the flour. They made kites on
the back porch and sold them for a nickel a piece, he and the Patterson
boy. Jason was treasurer.
 There was no nigger in this car, and the hats unbleached as yet flowing
past under the window. Going to Harvard. We have sold Benjy's He lay
on the ground under the window, bellowing. We have sold Benjy's
pasture so that Quentin may go to Harvard a brother to you. Your little
brother.
 You should have a car it's done you no end of good dont you think so
Quentin I call him Quentin at once you see I have heard so much about
him from Candace.
 Why shouldn't you I want my boys to be more than friends yes Candace
and Quentin more than friends Father I have committed what a pity
you had no brother or sister No sister no sister had no sister Dont ask
Quentin he and Mr Compson both feel a little insulted when I am strong
enough to come down to the table I am going on nerve now I'll pay for it
after it's all over and you have taken my little daughter away from me My
little sister had no. If I could say Mother. Mother
 Unless I do what I am tempted to and take you instead I dont think Mr
Compson could overtake the car.
 Ah Herbert Candace do you hear that She wouldn't look at me soft
stubborn jaw-angle not back-looking You needn't be jealous though it's
just an old woman he's flattering a grown married daughter I cant believe
it.
 Nonsense you look like a girl you are lots younger than Candace color in
your cheeks like a girl A face reproachful tearful an odor of camphor and
of tears a voice weeping steadily and softly beyond the twilit door the
twilight-colored smell of honeysuckle. Bringing empty trunks down the
attic stairs they sounded like coffins French Lick. Found not death at the
salt lick
 Hats not unbleached and not hats. In three years I can not wear a hat. I
could not. Was. Will there be hats then since I was not and not Harvard
then. Where the best of thought Father said clings like dead ivy vines upon
old dead brick. Not Harvard then. Not to me, anyway. Again. Sadder than
was. Again. Saddest of all. Again.
 Spoade had a shirt on; then it must be. When I can see my shadow again
if not careful that I tricked into the water shall tread again upon my
impervious shadow. But no sister. I wouldn't have done it. I wont have
my daughter spied on I wouldn't have.
 How can I control any of them when you have always taught them to
have no respect for me and my wishes I know you look down on my
people but is that any reason for teaching my children my own children I
suffered for to have no respect Trampling my shadow's bones into the
concrete with hard heels and then I was hearing the watch, and I touched
the letters through my coat.
 I will not have my daughter spied on by you or Quentin or anybody no
matter what you think she has done
 At least you agree there is reason for having her watched
 I wouldn't have I wouldn't have. I know you wouldn't I didn't mean to
speak so sharply but have no respect for each other for themselves
 But why did she The chimes began as I stepped on my shadow, but it
was the quarter hour. The Deacon wasn't in sight anywhere. think I would
have could have
 She didn't mean that that's the way women do things it's because she
loves Caddy
 The street lamps would go down the hill then rise toward town I
walked upon the belly of my shadow. I could extend my hand beyond it.
feeling Father behind me beyond the rasping darkness of summer and
August the street lamps Father and I protect women from one another
from themselves our women Women are like that they dont acquire
knowledge of people we are for that they are just born with a practical
fertility of suspicion that makes a crop every so often and usually right
they have an affinity for evil for supplying whatever the evil lacks in itself
for drawing it about them instinctively as you do bed-clothing in slumber
fertilising the mind for it until the evil has served its purpose whether it
ever existed or no He was coming along between a couple of freshmen.
He hadn't quite recovered from the parade, for he gave me a salute, a very
superior-officerish kind.
 "I want to see you a minute," I said, stopping.
 "See me? All right. See you again, fellows," he said, stopping and turning
back; "glad to have chatted with you." That was the Deacon, all over. Talk
about your natural psychologists. They said he hadn't missed a train at the
beginning of school in forty years, and that he could pick out a Southerner
with one glance. He never missed, and once he had heard you speak, he
could name your state. He had a regular uniform he met trains in, a sort of
Uncle Tom's cabin outfit, patches and all.
 "Yes, suh. Right dis way, young marster, hyer we is," taking your bags.
"Hyer, boy, come hyer and git dese grips." Whereupon a moving mountain
of luggage would edge up, revealing a white boy of about fifteen, and the
Deacon would hang another bag on him somehow and drive him off. "Now,
den, dont you crap hit. Yes, suh, young marster, jes give de old nigger yo
room number, and hit'll be done got cold afar when you arrives."
 From then on until he had you completely subjugated he was always in
or out of your room, ubiquitous and garrulous, though his manner
gradually moved northward as his raiment improved, until at last when he
had bled you until you began to learn better he was calling you Quentin or
whatever, and when you saw him next he'd be wearing a cast-off Brooks
suit and a hat with a Princeton club I forget which band that someone had
given him and which he was pleasantly and unshakably convinced was a
part of Abe Lincoln's military sash. Someone spread the story years ago,
when he first appeared around college from wherever he came from, that
he was a graduate of the divinity school. And when he came to understand
what it meant he was so taken with it that he began to retail the story
himself, until at last he must have come to believe he really had. Anyway he
related long pointless anecdotes of his undergraduate days, speaking
familiarly of dead and departed professors by their first names, usually
incorrect ones. But he had been guide mentor and friend to unnumbered
crops of innocent and lonely freshmen, and I suppose that with all his petty
chicanery and hypocrisy he stank no higher in heaven's nostrils than any
other.
 "Haven't seen you in three-four days," he said, staring at me from his
still military aura. "You been sick?"
 "No. I've been all right. Working, I reckon. I've seen you, though."
 "Yes?"
 "In the parade the other day."
 "Oh, that. Yes, I was there. I dont care nothing about that sort of thing,
you understand, but the boys likes to have me with them, the vet'runs does.
Ladies wants all the old vet'runs to turn out, you know. So I has to oblige
them."
 "And on that Wop holiday too," I said. "You were obliging the W. C. T.
U. then, I reckon."
 "That? I was doing that for my son-in-law. He aims to get a job on the
city forces. Street cleaner. I tells him all he wants is a broom to sleep on.
You saw me, did you?"
 "Both times. Yes."
 "I mean, in uniform. How'd I look?"
 "You looked fine. You looked better than any of them. They ought to
make you a general, Deacon."
 He touched my arm, lightly, his hand that worn, gentle quality of
niggers' hands. "Listen. This aint for outside talking. I dont mind telling
you because you and me's the same folks, come long and short." He leaned
a little to me, speaking rapidly, his eyes not looking at me. "I've got strings
out, right now. Wait till next year. Just wait. Then see where I'm marching.
I wont need to tell you how I'm fixing it; I say, just wait and see, my boy."
He looked at me now and clapped me lightly on the shoulder and rocked
back on his heels, nodding at me. "Yes, sir. I didn't turn Democrat three
years ago for nothing. My son-in-law on the city; me-- Yes, sir. If just
turning Democrat'll make that son of a bitch go to work.... And me: just you
stand on that corner yonder a year from two days ago, and see."
 "I hope so. You deserve it, Deacon. And while I think about it--" I took
the letter from my pocket. "Take this around to my room tomorrow and
give it to Shreve. He'll have something for you. But not till
tomorrow,mind."
 He took the letter and examined it. "It's sealed up."
 "Yes. And it's written inside, Not good until tomorrow."
 "H'm," he said. He looked at the envelope, his mouth pursed.
"Something for me, you say?"
 "Yes. A present I'm making you."
 He was looking at me now, the envelope white in his black hand, in the
sun. His eyes were soft and irisless and brown, and suddenly I saw Roskus
watching me from behind all his whitefolks' claptrap of uniforms and
politics and Harvard manner, diffident, secret, inarticulate and sad. "You
aint playing a joke on the old nigger, is you?"
 "You know I'm not. Did any Southerner ever play a joke on you?"
 "You're right. They're fine folks. But you cant live with them."
 "Did you ever try?" I said. But Roskus was gone. Once more he was that
self he had long since taught himself to
 "I'll confer to your wishes, my boy."
 "Not until tomorrow, remember."
 "Sure," he said; "understood, my boy. Well--"
 "I hope--" I said. He looked down at me, benignant, profound. Suddenly
I held out my hand and we shook, he gravely, from the pompous height of
his municipal and military dream. "You're a good fellow, Deacon. I hope....
You've helped a lot of young fellows, here and there."
 "I've tried to treat all folks right," he said. "I draw no petty social lines. A
man to me is a man, wherever I find him."
 "I hope you'll always find as many friends as you've made."
 "Young fellows. I get along with them. They dont forget me, neither," he
said, waving the envelope. He put it into his pocket and buttoned his coat.
"Yes, sir," he said. "I've had good friends."
 The chimes began again, the half hour. I stood in the belly of my shadow
and listened to the strokes spaced and tranquil along the sunlight, among
the thin, still little leaves. Spaced and peaceful and serene, with that quality
of autumn always in bells even in the month of brides. Lying on the
ground under the window bellowing He took one look at her and knew.
Out of the mouths of babes. The street lamps The chimes ceased. I went
back to the postoffice, treading my shadow into pavement. go down the hill
then they rise toward town like lanterns hung one above another on a
wall. Father said because she loves Caddy she loves people through their
shortcomings. Uncle Maury straddling his legs before the fire must remove
one hand long enough to drink Christmas. Jason ran on, his hands in his
pockets fell down and lay there like a trussed fowl until Versh set him up.
Whyn't you keep them hands outen your pockets when you running you
could stand up then Rolling his head in the cradle rolling it flat across the
back. Caddy told Jason and Versh that the reason Uncle Maury didn't work
was that he used to roll his head in the cradle when he was little.
 Shreve was coming up the walk, shambling, fatly earnest, his glasses
glinting beneath the running leaves like little pools.
 "I gave Deacon a note for some things. I may not be in this afternoon, so
dont you let him have anything until tomorrow, will you?"
 "All right." He looked at me. "Say, what're you doing today, anyhow? All
dressed up and mooning around like the prologue to a suttee. Did you go to
Psychology this morning?"
 "I'm not doing anything. Not until tomorrow, now."
 "What's that you got there?"
 "Nothing. Pair of shoes I had half-soled. Not until tomorrow, you hear?"
 "Sure. All right. Oh, by the way, did you get a letter off the table this
morning?"
 "No."
 "It's there. From Semiramis. Chauffeur brought it before ten oclock."
 "All right. I'll get it. Wonder what she wants now."
 "Another band recital, I guess. Tumpty ta ta Gerald blah. 'A little louder
on the drum, Quentin'. God, I'm glad I'm not a gentleman." He went on,
nursing a book, a little shapeless, fatly intent. The street lamps do you
think so because one of our forefathers was a governor and three were
generals and Mother's weren't
 any live man is better than any dead man but no live or dead man is very
much better than any other live or dead man Done in Mother's mind
though. Finished. Finished. Then we were all poisoned you are confusing
sin and morality women dont do that your mother is thinking of morality
whether it be sin or not has not occurred to her
 Jason I must go away you keep the others I'll take Jason and go where
nobody knows us so he'll have a chance to grow up and forget all this the
others dont love me they have never loved anything with that streak of
Compson selfishness and false pride Jason was the only one my heart went
out to without dread
 nonsense Jason is all right I was thinking that as soon as you feel better
you and Caddy might go up to French Lick
 and leave Jason here with nobody but you and the darkies
 she will forget him then all the talk will die away found not death at
the salt licks
 maybe I could find a husband for her not death at the salt licks
 The car came up and stopped. The bells were still ring ing the half hour.
I got on and it went on again, blotting the half hour. No: the three quarters.
Then it would be ten minutes anyway. To leave Harvard your mother's
dream for sold Benjy's pasture for
 what have I done to have been given children like these Benjamin was
punishment enough and now for her to have no more regard for me her
own mother I've suffered for her dreamed and planned and sacrificed I
went down into the valley yet never since she opened her eyes has she
given me one unselfish thought at times I look at her I wonder if she can be
my child except Jason he has never given me one moment's sorrow since I
first held him in my arms I knew then that he was to be my joy and my
salvation I thought that Benjamin was punishment enough for any sins I
have committed I thought he was my punishment for putting aside my
pride and marrying a man who held himself above me I dont complain I
loved him above all of them because of it because my duty though Jason
pulling at my heart all the while but I see now that I have not suffered
enough I see now that I must pay for your sins as well as mine what have
you done what sins have your high and mighty people visited upon me but
you'll take up for them you always have found excuses for your own blood
only Jason can do wrong because he is more Bascomb than Compson while
your own daughter my little daughter my baby girl she is she is no better
than that when I was a girl I was unfortunate I was only a Bascomb I was
taught that there is no halfway ground that a woman is either a lady or not
but I never dreamed when I held her in my arms that any daughter of mine
could let herself dont you know I can look at her eyes and tell you may
think she'd tell you but she doesn't tell things she is secretive you dont
know her I know things she's done that I'd die before I'd have you know
that's it go on criticise Jason accuse me of setting him to watch her as if it
were a crime while your own daughter can I know you dont love him that
you wish to believe faults against him you never have yes ridicule him as
you always have Maury you cannot hurt me any more than your children
already have and then I'll be gone and Jason with no one to love him shield
him from this I look at him every day dreading to see this Compson blood
beginning to show in him at last with his sister slipping out to see what do
you call it then have you ever laid eyes on him will you even let me try to
find out who he is it's not for myself I couldn't bear to see him it's for your
sake to protect you but who can fight against bad blood you wont let me try
we are to sit back with our hands folded while she not only drags your
name in the dirt but corrupts the very air your children breathe Jason you
must let me go away I cannot stand it let me have Jason and you keep the
others they're not my flesh and blood like he is strangers nothing of mine
and I am afraid of them I can take Jason and go where we are not known
I'll go down on my knees and pray for the absolution of my sins that he
may escape this curse try to forget that the others ever were
 If that was the three quarters, not over ten minutes now. One car had
just left, and people were already waiting for the next one. I asked, but he
didn't know whether another one would leave before noon or not because
you'd think that interurbans. So the first one was another trolley. I got on.
You can feel noon. I wonder if even miners in the bowels of the earth.
That's why whistles: because people that sweat, and if just far enough from
sweat you wont hear whistles and in eight minutes you should be that far
from sweat in Boston. Father said a man is the sum of his misfortunes. One
day you'd think misfortune would get tired, but then time is your
misfortune Father said. A gull on an invisible wire attached through space
dragged. You carry the symbol of your frustration into eternity. Then the
wings are bigger Father said only who can play a harp.
 I could hear my watch whenever the car stopped, but not often they
were already eating Who would play a Eating the business of eating
inside of you space too space and time confused Stomach saying noon
brain saying eat oclock All right I wonder what time it is what of it. People
were getting out. The trolley didn't stop so often now, emptied by eating.
 Then it was past. I got off and stood in my shadow and after a while a
car came along and I got on and went back to the interurban station. There
was a car ready to leave, and I found a seat next the window and it started
and I watched it sort of frazzle out into slack tide flats, and then trees. Now
and then I saw the river and I thought how nice it would be for them down
at New London if the weather and Gerald's shell going solemnly up the
glinting forenoon and I wondered what the old woman would be wanting
now, sending me a note before ten oclock in the morning. What picture of
Gerald I to be one of the Dalton Ames oh asbestos Quentin has shot
background. Something with girls in it. Women do have always his voice
above the gabble voice that breathed an affinity for evil, for believing
that no woman is to be trusted, but that some men are too innocent to
protect themselves. Plain girls. Remote cousins and family friends whom
mere acquaintanceship invested with a sort of blood obligation noblesse
oblige. And she sitting there telling us before their faces what a shame it
was that Gerald should have all the family looks because a man didn't need
it, was better off without it but without it a girl was simply lost. Telling us
about Gerald's women in a Quentin has shot Herbert he shot his voice
through the floor of Caddy's room tone of smug approbation. "When he
was seventeen I said to him one day 'What a shame that you should have a
mouth like that it should be on a girl's face' and can you imagine the
curtains leaning in on the twilight upon the odor of the apple tree her
head against the twilight her arms behind her head kimono-winged the
voice that breathed o'er eden clothes upon the bed by the nose seen above
the apple what he said? just seventeen, mind. 'Mother' he said 'it often
is'." And him sitting there in attitudes regal watching two or three of them
through his eyelashes. They gushed like swallows swooping his eyelashes.
Shreve said he always had Are you going to look after Benjy and Father
 The less you say about Benjy and Father the better when have you ever
considered them Caddy
 Promise
 You needn't worry about them you're getting out in good shape
 Promise I'm sick you'll have to promise wondered who invented that
joke but then he always had considered Mrs Bland a remarkably preserved
woman he said she was grooming Gerald to seduce a duchess sometime.
She called Shreve that fat Canadian youth twice she arranged a new roommate for me without consulting me at all, once for me to move out, once
for
 He opened the door in the twilight. His face looked like a pumpkin pie.
 "Well, I'll say a fond farewell. Cruel fate may part us, but I will never
love another. Never."
 "What are you talking about?"
 "I'm talking about cruel fate in eight yards of apricot silk and more
metal pound for pound than a galley slave and the sole owner and
proprietor of the unchallenged peripatetic john of the late Confederacy."
Then he told me how she had gone to the proctor to have him moved out
and how the proctor had revealed enough low stubbornness to insist on
consulting Shreve first. Then she suggested that he send for Shreve right
off and do it, and he wouldn't do that, so after that she was hardly civil to
Shreve. "I make it a point never to speak harshly of females," Shreve said,
"but that woman has got more ways like a bitch than any lady in these
sovereign states and dominions." and now Letter on the table by hand,
command orchid scented colored If she knew I had passed almost beneath
the window knowing it there without My dear Madam I have not yet had
an opportunity of receiving your communication but I beg in advance to be
excused today or yesterday and tomorrow or when As I remember that the
next one is to be how Gerald throws his nigger downstairs and how the
nigger plead to be allowed to matriculate in the divinity school to be near
marster marse gerald and How he ran all the way to the station beside the
carriage with tears in his eyes when marse gerald rid away I will wait until
the day for the one about the sawmill husband came to the kitchen door
with a shotgun Gerald went down and bit the gun in two and handed it
back and wiped his hands on a silk handkerchief threw the handkerchief in
the stove I've only heard that one twice
 shot him through the I saw you come in here so I watched my chance
and came along thought we might get acquainted have a cigar
Thanks I dont smoke
No things must have changed up there since my day mind if I light up
Help yourself
Thanks I've heard a lot I guess your mother wont mind if I put the match
behind the screen will she a lot about you Candace talked about you all the
time up there at the Licks I got pretty jealous I says to myself who is this
Quentin anyway I must see what this animal looks like because I was hit
pretty hard see soon as I saw the little girl I dont mind telling you it never
occurred to me it was her brother she kept talking about she couldn't have
talked about you any more if you'd been the only man in the world
husband wouldn't have been in it you wont change your mind and have a
smoke
I dont smoke
In that case I wont insist even though it is a pretty fair weed cost me
twenty-five bucks a hundred wholesale friend of in Havana yes I guess
there are lots of changes up there I keep promising myself a visit but I
never get around to it been hitting the ball now for ten years I cant get
away from the bank during school fellow's habits change things that seem
important to an undergraduate you know tell me about things up there
I'm not going to tell Father and Mother if that's what you are getting at
Not going to tell not going to oh that that's what you are talking about is it
you understand that I dont give a damn whether you tell or not understand
that a thing like that unfortunate but no police crime I wasn't the first or
the last I was just unlucky you might have been luckier
You lie
Keep your shirt on I'm not trying to make you tell anything you dont want
to meant no offense of course a young fellow like you would consider a
thing of that sort a lot more serious than you will in five years
I dont know but one way to consider cheating I dont think I'm likely to
learn different at Harvard
We're better than a play you must have made the Dramat well you're right
no need to tell them we'll let bygones be bygones eh no reason why you and
I should let a little thing like that come between us I like you Quentin I like
your appearance you dont look like these other hicks I'm glad we're going
to hit it off like this I've promised your mother to do something for Jason
but I would like to give you a hand too Jason would be just as well off here
but there's no future in a hole like this for a young fellow like you
Thanks you'd better stick to Jason he'd suit you better than I would
I'm sorry about that business but a kid like I was then I never had a mother
like yours to teach me the finer points it would just hurt her unnecessarily
to know it yes you're right no need to that includes Candace of course
I said Mother and Father
Look here take a look at me how long do you think you'd last with me
I wont have to last long if you learned to fight up at school too try and see
how long I would
You damned little what do you think you're getting at
Try and see
My God the cigar what would your mother say if she found a blister on her
mantel just in time too look here Quentin we're about to do something we'll
both regret I like you liked you as soon as I saw you I says he must be a
damned good fellow whoever he is or Candace wouldn't be so keen on him
listen I've been out in the world now for ten years things dont matter so
much then you'll find that out let's you and I get together on this thing sons
of old Harvard and all I guess I wouldn't know the place now best place for
a young fellow in the world I'm going to send my sons there give them a
better chance than I had wait dont go yet let's discuss this thing a young
man gets these ideas and I'm all for them does him good while he's in
school forms his character good for tradition the school but when he gets
out into the world he'll have to get his the best way he can because he'll
find that everybody else is doing the same thing and be damned to here
let's shake hands and let bygones be bygones for your mother's sake
remember her health come on give me your hand here look at it it's just out
of convent look not a blemish not even been creased yet see here
To hell with your money
No no come on I belong to the family now see I know how it is with a young
fellow he has lots of private affairs it's always pretty hard to get the old man
to stump up for I know haven't I been there and not so long ago either but
now I'm getting married and all specially up there come on dont be a fool
listen when we get a chance for a real talk I want to tell you about a little
widow over in town
I've heard that too keep your damned money
Call it a loan then just shut your eyes a minute and you'll be fifty
Keep your hands off of me you'd better get that cigar off the mantel
Tell and be damned then see what it gets you if you were not a damned fool
you'd have seen that I've got them too tight for any half-baked Galahad of a
brother your mother's told me about your sort with your head swelled up
come in oh come in dear Quentin and I were just getting acquainted talking
about Harvard did you want me cant stay away from the old man can she
Go out a minute Herbert I want to talk to Quentin
Come in come in let's all have a gabfest and get acquainted I was just
telling Quentin Go on Herbert go out a while Well all right then I suppose
you and bubber do want to see one another once more eh
You'd better take that cigar off the mantel
Right as usual my boy then I'll toddle along let them order you around
while they can Quentin after day after tomorrow it'll be pretty please to the
old man wont it dear give us a kiss honey
Oh stop that save that for day after tomorrow
I'll want interest then dont let Quentin do anything he cant finish oh by the
way did I tell Quentin the story about the man's parrot and what happened
to it a sad story remind me of that think of it yourself ta-ta see you in the
funnypaper
Well
Well
What are you up to now
Nothing
You're meddling in my business again didn't you get enough of that last
summer
Caddy you've got fever You're sick how are you sick
 I'm just sick. I cant ask.
 Shot his voice through the
 Not that blackguard Caddy
 Now and then the river glinted beyond things in sort of swooping glints,
across noon and after. Good after now, though we had passed where he
was still pulling upstream majestical in the face of god gods. Better. Gods.
God would be canaille too in Boston in Massachusetts. Or maybe just not a
husband. The wet oars winking him along in bright winks and female
palms. Adulant. Adulant if not a husband he'd ignore God. That
blackguard, Caddy The river glinted away beyond a swooping curve.
 I'm sick you'll have to promise
 Sick how are you sick
 I'm just sick I cant ask anybody yet promise you will
 If they need any looking after it's because of you how are you sick
Under the window we could hear the car leaving for the station, the 8:10
train. To bring back cousins. Heads. Increasing himself head by head but
not barbers. Manicure girls. We had a blood horse once. In the stable yes,
but under leather a cur. Quentin has shot all of their voices through the
floor of Caddy's room
 The car stopped. I got off, into the middle of my shadow. A road crossed
the track. There was a wooden marquee with an old man eating something
out of a paper bag, and then the car was out of hearing too. The road went
into trees, where it would be shady, but June foliage in New England not
much thicker than April at home. I could see a smoke stack. I turned my
back to it, tramping my shadow into the dust. There was something
terrible in me sometimes at night I could see it grinning at me I could see
it through them grinning at me through their faces it's gone now and I'm
sick
 Caddy
 Dont touch me just promise
 If you're sick you cant
 Yes I can after that it'll be all right it wont matter dont let them send
him to Jackson promise
 I promise Caddy Caddy
 Dont touch me dont touch me
 What does it look like Caddy
 What
 That that grins at you that thing through them
 I could still see the smoke stack. That's where the water would be,
healing out to the sea and the peaceful grottoes. Tumbling peacefully they
would, and when He said Rise only the flat irons. When Versh and I hunted
all day we wouldn't take any lunch, and at twelve oclock I'd get hungry. I'd
stay hungry until about one, then all of a sudden I'd even forget that I
wasn't hungry anymore. The street lamps go down the hill then heard the
car go down the hill. The chair-arm flat cool smooth under my forehead
shaping the chair the apple tree leaning on my hair above the eden clothes
by the nose seen You've got fever I felt it yesterday it's like being near a
stove.
 Dont touch me.
 Caddy you cant do it if you are sick. That blackguard.
 I've got to marry somebody.Then they told me the bone would have to
be broken again
 At last I couldn't see the smoke stack. The road went beside a wall. Trees
leaned over the wall, sprayed with sunlight. The stone was cool. Walking
near it you could feel the coolness. Only our country was not like this
country. There was something about just walking through it. A kind of still
and violent fecundity that satisfied even bread-hunger like. Flowing
around you, not brooding and nursing every niggard stone. Like it were put
to makeshift for enough green to go around among the trees and even the
blue of distance not that rich chimaera. told me the bone would have to
be broken again and inside me it began to say Ah Ah Ah and I began to
sweat. What do I care I know what a broken leg is all it is it wont be
anything I'll just have to stay in the house a little longer that's all and my
jaw-muscles getting numb and my mouth saying Wait Wait just a minute
through the sweat ah ah ah behind my teeth and Father damn that horse
damn that horse. Wait it's my fault. He came along the fence every
morning with a basket toward the kitchen dragging a stick along the
fence every morning I dragged myself to the window cast and all and laid
for him with a piece of coal Dilsey said you goin to ruin yoself aint you
got no mo sense than that not fo days since you bruck hit. Wait I'll get
used to it in a minute wait just a minute I'll get
 Even sound seemed to fail in this air, like the air was worn out with
carrying sounds so long. A dog's voice carries further than a train, in the
darkness anyway. And some people's. Niggers. Louis Hatcher never even
used his horn carrying it and that old lantern. I said, "Louis, when was the
last time you cleaned that lantern?"
 "I cleant hit a little while back. You member when all dat flood-watter
wash dem folks away up yonder? I cleans hit dat ve'y day. Old woman and
me settin fo de fire dat night and she say 'Louis, whut you gwine do ef dat
flood git out dis fur?' and I say 'Dat's a fack. I reckon I had better clean dat
lantun up.' So I cleant hit dat night."
 "That flood was way up in Pennsylvania," I said. "It couldn't ever have
got down this far."
 "Dat's whut you says," Louis said. "Watter kin git des ez high en wet in
Jefferson ez hit kin in Pennsylvaney, I reckon. Hit's de folks dat says de
high watter cant git dis fur dat comes floatin out on de ridge-pole, too."
 "Did you and Martha get out that night?"
 "We done jest cat. I cleans dat lantun and me and her sot de balance of
de night on top o dat knoll back de graveyard. En ef I'd a knowed of aihy
one higher, we'd a been on hit instead."
 "And you haven't cleaned that lantern since then."
 "Whut I want to clean hit when dey aint no need?"
 "You mean, until another flood comes along?"
 "Hit kep us outen dat un."
 "Oh, come on, Uncle Louis," I said.
 "Yes, suh. You do yo way en I do mine. Ef all I got to do to keep outen de
high watter is to clean dis yere lantun, I wont quoil wid no man."
 "Unc' Louis wouldn't ketch nothin wid a light he could see by," Versh
said.
 "I wuz huntin possums in dis country when dey was still drowndin nits
in yo pappy's head wid coal oil, boy," Louis said. "Ketchin um, too."
 "Dat's de troof," Versh said. "I reckon Unc' Louis done caught mo
possums than aihy man in dis country."
 "Yes, suh," Louis said. "I got plenty light fer possums to see, all right. I
aint heard none o dem complainin. Hush, now. Dar he. Whooey. Hum
awn, dawg." And we'd sit in the dry leaves that whispered a little with the
slow respiration of our waiting and with the slow breathing of the earth
and the windless October, the rank smell of the lantern fouling the brittle
air, listening to the dogs and to the echo of Louis' voice dying away. He
never raised it, yet on a still night we have heard it from our front porch.
When he called the dogs in he sounded just like the horn he carried slung
on his shoulder and never used, but clearer, mellower, as though his voice
were a part of darkness and silence, coiling out of it, coiling into it again.
WhoOoooo. WhoOoooo. WhoOooooooooooooooo. Got to marry somebody
 Have there been very many Caddy
 I dont know too many will you look after Benjy and Father
 You dont know whose it is then does he know
 Dont touch me will you look after Benjy and Father
 I began to feel the water before I came to the bridge. The bridge was of
gray stone, lichened, dappled with slow moisture where the fungus crept.
Beneath it the water was clear and still in the shadow, whispering and
clucking about the stone in fading swirls of spinning sky. Caddy that
 I've got to marry somebody Versh told me about a man who mutilated
himself. He went into the woods and did it with a razor, sitting in a ditch. A
broken razor flinging them backward over his shoulder the same motion
complete the jerked skein of blood backward not looping. But that's not it.
It's not not having them. It's never to have had them then I could say O
That That's Chinese I dont know Chinese. And Father said it's because you
are a virgin: dont you see? Women are never virgins. Purity is a negative
state and therefore contrary to nature. It's nature is hurting you not Caddy
and I said That's just words and he said So is virginity and I said you dont
know. You cant know and he said Yes. On the instant when we come to
realise that tragedy is second-hand.
 Where the shadow of the bridge fell I could see down for a long way, but
not as far as the bottom. When you leave a leaf in water a long time after a
while the tissue will be gone and the delicate fibers waving slow as the
motion of sleep. They dont touch one another, no matter how knotted up
they once were, no matter how close they lay once to the bones. And maybe
when He says Rise the eyes will come floating up too, out of the deep quiet
and the sleep, to look on glory. And after a while the flat irons would come
floating up. I hid them under the end of the bridge and went back and
leaned on the rail.
 I could not see the bottom, but I could see a long way into the motion of
the water before the eye gave out, and then I saw a shadow hanging like a
fat arrow stemming into the current. Mayflies skimmed in and out of the
shadow of the bridge just above the surface. If it could just be a hell beyond
that: the clean flame the two of us more than dead. Then you will have
only me then only me then the two of us amid the pointing and the horror
beyond the clean flame The arrow increased without motion, then in a
quick swirl the trout lipped a fly beneath the surface with that sort of
gigantic delicacy of an elephant picking up a peanut. The fading vortex
drifted away down stream and then I saw the arrow again, nose into the
current, wavering delicately to the motion of the water above which the
May flies slanted and poised. Only you and me then amid the pointing and
the horror walled by the clean flame
 The trout hung, delicate and motionless among the wavering shadows.
Three boys with fishing poles came onto the bridge and we leaned on the
rail and looked down at the trout. They knew the fish. He was a
neighborhood character.
 "They've been trying to catch that trout for twenty-five years. There's a
store in Boston offers a twenty-five dollar fishing rod to anybody that can
catch him."
 "Why dont you all catch him, then? Wouldn't you like to have a twentyfive dollar fishing rod?"
 "Yes," they said. They leaned on the rail, looking down at the trout. "I
sure would," one said.
 "I wouldn't take the rod," the second said. "I'd take the money instead."
 "Maybe they wouldn't do that," the first said. "I bet he'd make you take
the rod."
 "Then I'd sell it."
 "You couldn't get twenty-five dollars for it."
 "I'd take what I could get, then. I can catch just as many fish with this
pole as I could with a twenty-five dollar one." Then they talked about what
they would do with twenty-five dollars. They all talked at once, their voices
insistent and contradictory and impatient, making of unreality a
possibility, then a probability, then an incontrovertible fact, as people will
when their desires become words.
 "I'd buy a horse and wagon," the second said.
 "Yes you would," the others said.
 "I would. I know where I can buy one for twenty-five dollars. I know the
man."
 "Who is it?"
 "That's all right who it is. I can buy it for twenty-five dollars."
 "Yah," the others said. "He dont know any such thing. He's just talking."
 "Do you think so?" the boy said. They continued to jeer at him, but he
said nothing more. He leaned on the rail, looking down at the trout which
he had already spent, and suddenly the acrimony, the conflict, was gone
from their voices, as if to them too it was as though he had captured the
fish and bought his horse and wagon, they too partaking of that adult trait
of being convinced of anything by an assumption of silent superiority. I
suppose that people, using themselves and each other so much by words,
are at least consistent in attributing wisdom to a still tongue, and for a
while I could feel the other two seeking swiftly for some means by which to
cope with him, to rob him of his horse and wagon.
 "You couldn't get twenty-five dollars for that pole," the first said. "I bet
anything you couldn't."
 "He hasn't caught that trout yet," the third said suddenly, then they both
cried:
 "Yah, what'd I tell you? What's the man's name? I dare you to tell. There
aint any such man."
 "Ah, shut up," the second said. "Look. Here he comes again." They
leaned on the rail, motionless, identical, their poles slanting slenderly in
the sunlight, also identical. The trout rose without haste, a shadow in faint
wavering increase; again the little vortex faded slowly downstream. "Gee,"
the first one murmured.
 "We dont try to catch him anymore," he said. "We just watch Boston
folks that come out and try."
 "Is he the only fish in this pool?"
 "Yes. He ran all the others out. The best place to fish around here is
down at the Eddy."
 "No it aint," the second said. "It's better at Bigelow's Mill two to one."
Then they argued for a while about which was the best fishing and then left
off all of a sudden to watch the trout rise again and the broken swirl of
water suck down a little of the sky. I asked how far it was to the nearest
town. They told me.
 "But the closest car line is that way," the second said, pointing back
down the road. "Where are you going?"
 "Nowhere. Just walking."
 "You from the college?"
 "Yes. Are there any factories in that town?"
 "Factories?" They looked at me.
 "No," the second said. "Not there." They looked at my clothes. "You
looking for work?"
 "How about Bigelow's Mill?" the third said. "That's a factory."
 "Factory my eye. He means a sure enough factory."
 "One with a whistle," I said. "I haven't heard any one oclock whistles
yet."
 "Oh," the second said. "There's a clock in the unitarial steeple. You can
find out the time from that. Haven't you got a watch on that chain?"
 "I broke it this morning." I showed them my watch. They examined it
gravely.
 "It's still running," the second said. "What does a watch like that cost?"
 "It was a present," I said. "My father gave it to me when I graduated
from high school."
 "Are you a Canadian?" the third said. He had red hair.
 "Canadian?"
 "He dont talk like them," the second said. "I've heard them talk. He talks
like they do in minstrel shows."
 "Say," the third said. "Aint you afraid he'll hit you?"
 "Hit me?"
 "You said he talks like a colored man."
 "Ah, dry up," the second said. "You can see the steeple when you get
over that hill there."
 I thanked them. "I hope you have good luck. Only dont catch that old
fellow down there. He deserves to be let alone."
 "Cant anybody catch that fish," the first said. They leaned on the rail,
looking down into the water, the three poles like three slanting threads of
yellow fire in the sun. I walked upon my shadow, tramping it into the
dappled shade of trees again. The road curved, mounting away from the
water. It crossed the hill, then descended winding, carrying the eye, the
mind on ahead beneath a still green tunnel, and the square cupola above
the trees and the round eye of the clock but far enough. I sat down at the
roadside. The grass was ankle deep, myriad. The shadows on the road were
as still as if they had been put there with a stencil, with slanting pencils of
sunlight. But it was only a train, and after a while it died away beyond the
trees, the long sound, and then I could hear my watch and the train dying
away, as though it were running through another month or another
summer somewhere, rushing away under the poised gull and all things
rushing. Except Gerald. He would be sort of grand too, pulling in lonely
state across the noon, rowing himself right out of noon, up the long bright
air like an apotheosis, mounting into a drowsing infinity where only he and
the gull, the one terrifically motionless, the other in a steady and measured
pull and recover that partook of inertia itself, the world punily beneath
their shadows on the sun. Caddy that blackguard that blackguard Caddy
 Their voices came over the hill, and the three slender poles like balanced
threads of running fire. They looked at me passing, not slowing.
 "Well," I said. "I dont see him."
 "We didn't try to catch him," the first said. "You cant catch that fish."
 "There's the clock," the second said, pointing. "You can tell the time
when you get a little closer."
 "Yes," I said. "All right." I got up. "You all going to town?"
 "We're going to the Eddy for chub," the first said.
 "You cant catch anything at the Eddy," the second said.
 "I guess you want to go to the mill, with a lot of fellows splashing and
scaring all the fish away."
 "You cant catch any fish at the Eddy."
 "We wont catch none nowhere if we dont go on," the third said.
 "I dont see why you keep on talking about the Eddy," the second said.
"You cant catch anything there."
 "You dont have to go," the first said. "You're not tied to me."
 "Let's go to the mill and go swimming," the third said.
 "I'm going to the Eddy and fish," the first said. "You can do as you
please."
 "Say, how long has it been since you heard of anybody catching a fish at
the Eddy?" the second said to the third.
 "Let's go to the mill and go swimming," the third said. The cupola sank
slowly beyond the trees, with the round face of the clock far enough yet. We
went on in the dappled shade. We came to an orchard, pink and white. It
was full of bees; already we could hear them.
 "Let's go to the mill and go swimming," the third said. A lane turned off
beside the orchard. The third boy slowed and halted. The first went on,
flecks of sunlight slipping along the pole across his shoulder and down the
back of his shirt. "Come on," the third said. The second boy stopped too.
Why must you marry somebody Caddy
 Do you want me to say it do you think that if I say it it wont be
 "Let's go up to the mill," he said. "Come on."
 The first boy went on. His bare feet made no sound, falling softer than
leaves in the thin dust. In the orchard the bees sounded like a wind getting
up, a sound caught by a spell just under crescendo and sustained. The lane
went along the wall, arched over, shattered with bloom, dissolving into
trees. Sunlight slanted into it, sparse and eager. Yellow butterflies flickered
along the shade like flecks of sun.
 "What do you want to go to the Eddy for?" the second boy said. "You can
fish at the mill if you want to."
 "Ah, let him go," the third said. They looked after the first boy. Sunlight
slid patchily across his walking shoulders, glinting along the pole like
yellow ants.
 "Kenny," the second said. Say it to Father will you I will am my fathers
Progenitive I invented him created I him Say it to him it will not be for he
will say I was not and then you and I since philoprogenitive
 "Ah, come on," the third boy said. "They're already in." They looked
after the first boy. "Yah," they said suddenly, "go on then, mamma's boy. If
he goes swimming he'll get his head wet and then he'll get a licking." They
turned into the lane and went on, the yellow butterflies slanting about
them along the shade.
 it is because there is nothing else I believe there is something else but
there may not be and then I You will find that even injustice is scarcely
worthy of what you believe yourself to be He paid me no attention, his
jaw set in profile, his face turned a little away beneath his broken hat.
 "Why dont you go swimming with them?" I said. that blackguard Caddy
 Were you trying to pick a fight with him were you
 A liar and a scoundrel Caddy was dropped from his club for cheating
at cards got sent to Coventry caught cheating at midterm exams and
expelled
 Well what about it I'm not going to play cards with
 "Do you like fishing better than swimming?" I said. The sound of the
bees diminished, sustained yet, as though instead of sinking into silence,
silence merely increased between us, as water rises. The road curved again
and became a street between shady lawns with white houses. Caddy that
blackguard can you think of Benjy and Father and do it not of me
 What else can I think about what else have I thought about The boy
turned from the street. He climbed a picket fence without looking back and
crossed the lawn to a tree and laid the pole down and climbed into the fork
of the tree and sat there, his back to the road and the dappled sun
motionless at last upon his white shirt. else have I thought about I cant
even cry I died last year I told you I had but I didn't know then what I
meant I didn't know what I was saying Some days in late August at
home are like this, the air thin and eager like this, with something in it sad
and nostalgic and familiar. Man the sum of his climatic experiences Father
said. Man the sum of what have you. A problem in impure properties
carried tediously to an unvarying nil: stalemate of dust and desire. but
now I know I'm dead I tell you
 Then why must you listen we can go away you and Benjy and me
where nobody knows us where The buggy was drawn by a white horse,
his feet cropping in the thin dust; spidery wheels chattering thin and dry,
moving uphill beneath a rippling shawl of leaves. Elm. No: ellum. Ellum.
 On what on your school money the money they sold the pasture for so
you could go to Harvard dont you see you've got to finish now if you dont
finish he'll have nothing
 Sold the pasture His white shirt was motionless in the fork, in the
flickering shade. The wheels were spidery. Beneath the sag of the buggy the
hooves neatly rapid like the motions of a lady doing embroidery,
diminishing without progress like a figure on a treadmill being drawn
rapidly offstage. The street turned again. I could see the white cupola, the
round stupid assertion of the clock. Sold the pasture
 Father will be dead in a year they say if he doesn't stop drinking and he
wont stop he cant stop since I since last summer and then they'll send
Benjy to Jackson I cant cry I cant even cry one minute she was standing
in the door the next minute he was pulling at her dress and bellowing his
voice hammered back and forth between the walls in waves and she
shrinking against the wall getting smaller and smaller with her white
face her eyes like thumbs dug into it until he pushed her out of the room
his voice hammering back and forth as though its own momentum would
not let it stop as though there were no place for it in silence bellowing
 When you opened the door a bell tinkled, but just once, high and clear
and small in the neat obscurity above the door, as though it were gauged
and tempered to make that single clear small sound so as not to wear the
bell out nor to require the expenditure of too much silence in restoring it
when the door opened upon the recent warm scent of baking; a little dirty
child with eyes like a toy bear's and two patent-leather pigtails.
 "Hello, sister." Her face was like a cup of milk dashed with coffee in the
sweet warm emptiness. "Anybody here?"
 But she merely watched me until a door opened and the lady came.
Above the counter where the ranks of crisp shapes behind the glass her
neat gray face her hair tight and sparse from her neat gray skull, spectacles
in neat gray rims riding approaching like something on a wire, like a cash
box in a store. She looked like a librarian. Something among dusty shelves
of ordered certitudes long divorced from reality, desiccating peacefully, as
if a breath of that air which sees injustice done
 "Two of these, please, ma'am."
 From under the counter she produced a square cut from a newspaper
and laid it on the counter and lifted the two buns out. The little girl
watched them with still and unwinking eyes like two currants floating
motionless in a cup of weak coffee Land of the kike home of the wop.
Watching the bread, the neat gray hands, a broad gold band on the left
forefinger, knuckled there by a blue knuckle.
 "Do you do your own baking, ma'am?"
 "Sir?" she said. Like that. Sir? Like on the stage. Sir? "Five cents. Was
there anything else?"
 "No, ma'am. Not for me. This lady wants something." She was not tall
enough to see over the case, so she went to the end of the counter and
looked at the little girl.
 "Did you bring her in here?"
 "No, ma'am. She was here when I came."
 "You little wretch," she said. She came out around the counter, but she
didn't touch the little girl. "Have you got anything in your pockets?"
 "She hasn't got any pockets," I said. "She wasn't doing anything. She was
just standing here, waiting for you."
 "Why didn't the bell ring, then?" She glared at me. She just needed a
bunch of switches, a blackboard behind her 2 x 2 e 5. "She'll hide it under
her dress and a body'd never know it. You, child. How'd you get in here?"
 The little girl said nothing. She looked at the woman, then she gave me
a flying black glance and looked at the woman again. "Them foreigners,"
the woman said. "How'd she get in without the bell ringing?"
 "She came in when I opened the door," I said. "It rang once for both of
us. She couldn't reach anything from here, anyway. Besides, I dont think
she would. Would you, sister?" The little girl looked at me, secretive,
contemplative. "What do you want? bread?"
 She extended her fist. It uncurled upon a nickel, moist and dirty, moist
dirt ridged into her flesh. The coin was damp and warm. I could smell it,
faintly metallic.
 "Have you got a five cent loaf, please, ma'am?"
 From beneath the counter she produced a square cut from a newspaper
sheet and laid it on the counter and wrapped a loaf into it. I laid the coin
and another one on the counter. "And another one of those buns, please,
ma'am."
 She took another bun from the case. "Give me that parcel," she said. I
gave it to her and she unwrapped it and put the third bun in and wrapped
it and took up the coins and found two coppers in her apron and gave them
to me. I handed them to the little girl. Her fingers closed about them, damp
and hot, like worms.
 "You going to give her that bun?" the woman said.
 "Yessum," I said. "I expect your cooking smells as good to her as it does
to me."
 I took up the two packages and gave the bread to the little girl, the
woman all iron-gray behind the counter, watching us with cold certitude.
"You wait a minute," she said. She went to the rear. The door opened again
and closed. The little girl watched me, holding the bread against her dirty
dress.
 "What's your name?" I said. She quit looking at me, bu she was still
motionless. She didn't even seem to breathe. The woman returned. She had
a funny looking thing in her hand. She carried it sort of like it might have
been a dead pet rat.
 "Here," she said. The child looked at her. "Take it," the woman said,
jabbing it at the little girl. "It just looks peculiar. I calculate you wont know
the difference when you eat it. Here. I cant stand here all day." The child
took it, still watching her. The woman rubbed her hands on her apron. "I
got to have that bell fixed," she said. She went to the door and jerked it
open. The little bell tinkled once, faint and clear and invisible. We moved
toward the door and the woman's peering back.
 "Thank you for the cake," I said.
 "Them foreigners," she said, staring up into the obscurity where the bell
tinkled. "Take my advice and stay clear of them, young man."
 "Yessum," I said. "Come on, sister." We went out. "Thank you, ma'am."
 She swung the door to, then jerked it open again, making the bell give
forth its single small note. "Foreigners," she said, peering up at the bell.
 We went on. "Well," I said. "How about some ice cream?" She was
eating the gnarled cake. "Do you like ice cream?" She gave me a black still
look, chewing. "Come on."
 We came to the drugstore and had some ice cream. She wouldn't put
the loaf down. "Why not put it down so you can eat better?" I said, offering
to take it. But she held to it, chewing the ice cream like it was taffy. The
bitten cake lay on the table. She ate the ice cream steadily, then she fell to
on the cake again, looking about at the showcases. I finished mine and we
went out.
 "Which way do you live?" I said.
 A buggy, the one with the white horse it was. Only Doc Peabody is fat.
Three hundred pounds. You ride with him on the uphill side, holding on.
Children. Walking easier than holding uphill. Seen the doctor yet have
you seen Caddy
 I dont have to I cant ask now afterward it will be all right it wont
matter
 Because women so delicate so mysterious Father said. Delicate
equilibrium of periodical filth between two moons balanced. Moons he said
full and yellow as harvest moons her hips thighs. Outside outside of them
always but. Yellow. Feet soles with walking like. Then know that some man
that all those mysterious and imperious concealed. With all that inside of
them shapes an outward suavity waiting for a touch to. Liquid putrefaction
like drowned things floating like pale rubber flabbily filled getting the odor
of honeysuckle all mixed up.
 "You'd better take your bread on home, hadn't you?"
 She looked at me. She chewed quietly and steadily; at regular intervals a
small distension passed smoothly down her throat. I opened my package
and gave her one of the buns. "Goodbye," I said.
 I went on. Then I looked back. She was behind me. "Do you live down
this way?" She said nothing. She walked beside me, under my elbow sort
of, eating. We went on. It was quiet, hardly anyone about getting the odor
of honeysuckle all mixed She would have told me not to let me sit there on
the steps hearing her door twilight slamming hearing Benjy still crying
Supper she would have to come down then getting honeysuckle all mixed
up in it We reached the corner.
 "Well, I've got to go down this way," I said. "Goodbye." She stopped too.
She swallowed the last of the cake, then she began on the bun, watching me
across it. "Goodbye," I said. I turned into the street and went on, but I went
to the next corner before I stopped.
 "Which way do you live?" I said. "This way?" I pointed down the street.
She just looked at me. "Do you live over that way? I bet you live close to the
station, where the trains are. Dont you?" She just looked at me, serene and
secret and chewing. The street was empty both ways, with quiet lawns and
houses neat among the trees, but no one at all except back there. We
turned and went back. Two men sat in chairs in front of a store.
 "Do you all know this little girl? She sort of took up with me and I cant
find where she lives."
 They quit looking at me and looked at her.
 "Must be one of them new Italian families," one said. He wore a rusty
frock coat. "I've seen her before. What's your name, little girl?" looked at
them blackly for a while, her jaws moving steadily. She swallowed without
ceasing to chew.
 "Maybe she cant speak English," the other said.
 "They sent her after bread," I said. "She must be able to speak
something."
 "What's your pa's name?" the first said. "Pete? Joe? name John huh?"
She took another bite from the bun.
 "What must I do with her?" I said. "She just follows me. I've got to get
back to Boston."
 "You from the college?"
 "Yes, sir. And I've got to get on back."
 "You might go up the street and turn her over to Anse. He'll be up at the
livery stable. The marshal."
 "I reckon that's what I'll have to do," I said. "I've got to do something
with her. Much obliged. Come on, sister."
 We went up the street, on the shady side, where the shadow of the
broken facade blotted slowly across the road. We came to the livery stable.
The marshal wasn't there. A man sitting in a chair tilted in the broad low
door, where a dark cool breeze smelling of ammonia blew among the
ranked stalls, said to look at the postoffice. He didn't know her either.
 "Them furriners. I cant tell one from another. You might take her across
the tracks where they live, and maybe somebody'll claim her."
 We went to the postoflice. It was back down the street. The man in the
frock coat was opening a newspaper.
 "Anse just drove out of town," he said. "I guess you'd better go down
past the station and walk past them houses by the river. Somebody there'll
know her."
 "I guess I'll have to," I said. "Come on, sister." She pushed the last piece
of the bun into her mouth and swallowed it. "Want another?" I said. She
looked at me, chewing, her eyes black and unwinking and friendly. I took
the other two buns out and gave her one and bit into the other. I asked a
man where the station was and he showed me. "Come on, sister."
 We reached the station and crossed the tracks, where the river was. A
bridge crossed it, and a street of jumbled frame houses followed the river,
backed onto it. A shabby street, but with an air heterogeneous and vivid
too. In the center of an untrimmed plot enclosed by a fence of gaping and
broken pickets stood an ancient lopsided surrey and a weathered house
from an upper window of which hung a garment of vivid pink.
 "Does that look like your house?" I said. She looked at me over the bun.
"This one?" I said, pointing. She just chewed, but it seemed to me that I
discerned something affirmative, acquiescent even if it wasn't eager, in her
air. "This one?" I said. "Come on, then." I entered the broken gate. I looked
back at her. "Here?" I said. "This look like your house?"
 She nodded her head rapidly, looking at me, gnawing into the damp
halfmoon of the bread. We went on. A walk of broken random flags,
speared by fresh coarse blades of grass, led to the broken stoop. There was
no movement about the house at all, and the pink garment hanging in no
wind from the upper window. There was a bell pull with a porcelain knob,
attached to about six feet of wire when I stopped pulling and knocked. The
little girl had the crust edgeways in her chewing mouth.
 A woman opened the door. She looked at me, then she spoke rapidly to
the little girl in Italian, with a rising inflexion, then a pause, interrogatory.
She spoke to her again the little girl looking at her across the end of the
crust, pushing it into her mouth with a dirty hand
 "She says she lives here." I said. "I met her down town. Is this your
bread?
 "No spika," the woman said. She spoke to the little girl again. The little
girl just looked at her.
 "No live here?" I said. I pointed to the girl, then at her, then at the door.
The woman shook her head. She spoke rapidly. She came to the edge of the
porch and pointed down the road, speaking.
 I nodded violently too. "You come show?" I said. I took her arm, waving
my other hand toward the road. She spoke swiftly, pointing. "You come
show," I said, trying to lead her down the steps.
 "Si, si," she said, holding back, showing me whatever it was. I nodded
again.
 "Thanks. Thanks. Thanks." I went down the steps and walked toward
the gate, not running, but pretty fast. I reached the gate and stopped and
looked at her for a while. The crust was gone now, and she looked at me
with her black, friendly stare. The woman stood on the stoop, watching us.
 "Come on, then," I said. "We'll have to find the right one sooner or
later."
 She moved along just under my elbow. We went on. The houses all
seemed empty. Not a soul in sight. A sort of breathlessness that empty
houses have. Yet they couldn't all be empty. All the different rooms, if you
could just slice the walls away all of a sudden. Madam, your daughter, if
you please. No. Madam, for God's sake, your daughter. She moved along
just under my elbow, her shiny tight pigtails, and then the last house
played out and the road curved out of sight beyond a wall, following the
river. The woman was emerging from the broken gate, with a shawl over
ner head and clutched under her chary. The road curved on, empty. I found
a coin and gave it to the little girl. A quarter. "Goodbye, sister," I said. Then
I ran.
 I ran fast, not looking back. Just before the road curved away I looked
back. She stood in the road, a small figure clasping the loaf of bread to her
filthv little dress, her eyes still and black and unwinking I ran on
 A lane turned from the road. I entered it and after a while I slowed to a
fast walk. The lane went between back premises-- unpainted houses with
more of those gay and startling colored garments on lines, a barn broken-
backed, decaying quietly among rank orchard trees, unpruned and weedchoked, pink and white and murmurous with sunlight and with bees. I
looked back. The entrance to the lane was empty. I slowed still more, my
shadow pacing me, dragging its head through the weeds that hid the fence.
 The lane went back to a barred gate, became defunctive in grass, a mere
path scarred quietly into new grass. I climbed the gate into a woodlot and
crossed it and came to another wall and followed that one, my shadow
behind me now. There were vines and creepers where at home would be
honeysuckle. Coming and coming especially in the dusk when it rained,
getting honeysuckle all mixed up in it as though it were not enough without
that, not unbearable enough. What did you let him for kiss kiss
 I didn't let him I made him watching me getting mad What do you
think of that? Red print of my hand coming up through her face like
turning a light on under your hand her eyes going bright
 It's not for kissing I slapped you. Girl's elbows at fifteen Father said
you swallow like you had a fishbone in your throat what's the matter with
you and Caddy across the table not to look at me. It's for letting it be some
darn town squirt I slapped you you will will you now I guess you say calf
rope. My red hand coming up out of her face. What do you think of that
scouring her head into the. Grass sticks cries-crossed into the flesh
tingling scouring her head. Say calf rope say it
 I didn't kiss a dirty girl like Natalie anyway The wall went into
shadow, and then my shadow, I had tricked it again. I had forgot about the
river curving along the road. I climbed the wall. And then she watched me
jump down, holding the loaf against her dress.
 I stood in the weeds and we looked at one another for a while.
 "Why didn't you tell me you lived out this way, sister?" The loaf was
wearing slowly out of the paper; already it needed a new one. "Well, come
on then and show me the house." not a dirty girl like Natalie. It was
raining we could hear it on the roof, sighing through the high sweet
emptiness of the barn.
 There? touching her
 Not there
 There? not raining hard but we couldn't hear anything but the roof and
if it was my blood or her blood
 She pushed me down the ladder and ran off and left me Caddy did
 Was it there it hurt you when Caddy did ran off was it there
 Oh She walked just under my elbow, the top of her patent leather head,
the loaf fraying out of the newspaper.
 "If you dont get home pretty soon you're going to wear that loaf out. And
then what'll your mamma say?" I bet I can lift you up
 You cant I'm too heavy
 Did Caddy go away did she go to the house you cant see the barn from
our house did you ever try to see the barn from
 It was her fault she pushed me she ran away
 I can lift you up see how I can
 Oh her blood or my blood Oh We went on in the thin dust, our feet
silent as rubber in the thin dust where pencils of sun slanted in the trees.
And I could feel water again running swift and peaceful in the secret
shade.
 "You live a long way, dont you. You're mighty smart to go this far to
town by yourself." It's like dancing sitting down did you ever dance sitting
down? We could hear the rain, a rat in the crib, the empty barn vacant
with horses. How do you hold to dance do you hold like this
 Oh
 I used to hold like this you thought I wasn't strong enough didn't you
 Oh Oh Oh Oh
 I hold to use like this I mean did you hear what I said I said
 oh oh oh oh
 The road went on, still and empty, the sun slanting more and more. Her
stiff little Pigtails were bound at the tips with bits of crimson cloth. A
corner of the wrapping flapped a little as she walked, the nose of the loaf
naked. I stopped.
 "Look here. Do you live down this road? We haven't passed a house in a
mile, almost."
 She looked at me, black and secret and friendly.
 "Where do you live, sister? Dont you live back there in town?"
 There was a bird somewhere in the woods, beyond the broken and
infrequent slanting of sunlight.
 "Your Papa's going to be worried about you. Dont you reckon you'll get a
whipping for not coming straight home with that bread?"
The bird whistled again, invisible, a sound meaningless and profound,
inflexionless, ceasing as though cut off with the blow of a knife, and again,
and that sense of water swift and peaceful above secret places, felt, not
seen not heard.
 "Oh, hell, sister." About half the paper hung limp. "That's not doing any
good now." I tore it off and dropped it beside the road. "Come on. We'll
have to go back to town. We'll go back along the river."
 We left the road. Among the moss little pale flowers grew, and the sense
of water mute and unseen. I hold to use like this I mean I use to hold She
stood in the door looking at us her hands on her hips
 You pushed me it was your fault it hurt me too
 We were dancing sitting down I bet Caddy cant dance sitting down
 Stop that stop that
 I was just brushing the trash off the back of your dress
 You keep your nasty old hands off of me it was your fault you pushed
me down I'm mad at you
 I dont care she looked at us stay mad she went away We began to hear
the shouts, the splashings; I saw a brown body gleam for an instant.
 Stay mad. My shirt was getting wet and my hair. Across the roof
hearing the roof loud now I could see Natalie going through the garden
among the rain. Get wet I hope you catch pneumonia go on home
Cowface. I jumped hard as I could into the hogwallow the mud yellowed
up to my waist stinking I kept on plunging until I fell down and rolled
over in it "Hear them in swimming, sister? I wouldn't mind doing that
myself." If I had time. When I have time. I could hear my watch. mud was
warmer than the rain it smelled awful. She had her back turned I went
around in front of her. You know what I was doing? She turned her back I
went around in front of her the rain creeping into the mud flatting her
bod ice through her dress it smelled horrible. I was hugging her that's
what I was doing. She turned her back I went around in front of her. I
was hugging her I tell you.
 I dont give a damn what you were doing
 You dont you dont I'll make you I'll make you give a damn. She hit my
hands away I smeared mud on her with the other hand I couldn't feel the
wet smacking of her hand I wiped mud from my legs smeared it on her
wet hard turning body hearing her fingers going into my face but I
couldn't feel it even when the rain began to taste sweet on my lips
 They saw us from the water first, heads and shoulders. They yelled and
one rose squatting and sprang among them. They looked like beavers, the
water ripping about their chins, yelling.
 "Take that girl awayl What did you want to bring a girl here for? Go on
awayl"
 "She wont hurt you. We just want to watch you for a while."
 They squatted in the water. Their heads drew into a clump, atching us,
then they broke and rushed toward us, hurling water with their hands. We
moved quick.
 "Look out, boys; she wont hurt you."
 "Go on away, Harvard!" It was the second boy, the one that thought the
horse and wagon back there at the bridge. "Splash them, fellows!"
 "Let's get out and throw them in," another said. "I aint afraid of any
girl."
 " Splash them! Splash them!" They rushed toward us, hurling water. We
moved back. "Go on away!" they yelled. "Go on away!"
 We went away. They huddled just under the bank, their slick heads in a
row against the bright water. We went on. "That's not for us, is it." The sun
slanted through to the moss here and there, leveller. "Poor kid, you're just
a girl." Little flowers grew among the moss, littler than I had ever seen.
"You're just a girl. Poor kid." There was a path, curving along beside the
water. Then the water was still again, dark and still and swift. "Nothing but
a girl. Poor sister." We lay in the wet grass panting the rain like cold
shot on my back. Do you care now do you do you
 My Lord we sure are in a mess get up. Where the rain touched my
forehead it began to smart my hand came red away streaking off pink in
the rain. Does it hurt
 Of course it does what do you reckon
 I tried to scratch your eyes out my Lord we sure do stink we better try
to wash it off in the branch "There's town again, sister. You'll have to go
home now. I've got to get back to school. Look how late it's getting. You'll
go home now, wont you?" But she just looked at me with her black, secret,
friendly gaze, the half-naked loaf clutched to her breast. "It's wet. I thought
we jumped back in time." I took my handkerchief and tried to wipe the
loaf, but the crust began to come off, so I stopped. "We'll just have to let it
dry itself. Hold it like this." She held it like that. It looked kind of like rats
had been eating it now. and the water building and building up the
squatting back the sloughed mud stinking surfaceward pocking the
pattering surface like grease on a hot stove. I told you I'd make you
 I dont give a goddam what you do
 Then we heard the running and we stopped and looked back and saw
him coming up the path running, the level shadows flicking upon his legs.
 "He's in a hurry. We'd--" then I saw another man, an oldish man
running heavily, clutching a stick, and a boy naked from the waist up,
clutching his pants as he ran.
 " There's Julio," the little girl said, and then I saw his Italian face and his
eyes as he sprang upon me. We went down. His hands were jabbing at my
face and he was saying something and trying to bite me, I reckon, and then
they hauled him off and held him heaving and thrashing and yelling and
they held his arms and he tried to kick me until they dragged him back.
The little girl was howling, holding the loaf in both arms. The half naked
boy was darting and jumping up and down, clutching his trousers and
someone pulled me up in time to see another stark naked figure come
around the tranquil bend in the path running and change direction in
midstride and leap into the woods, a couple of garments rigid as boards
behind it. Julio still struggled. The man who had pulled me up said,
"Whoa, now. We got you." He wore a vest but no coat. Upon it was a met
shield In his other hand he clutched a knotted, polished stick.
 " You're Anse, aren't you?" I said. "I was looking for you. What's the
matter?"
 "I warn you that anything you say will be used aganst you," he said.
"You're under arrest."
 " I killa heem," Julio said. He struggled. Two men held him. The little
girl howled steadily, holding the bread. "You steala my seester," Julio said.
"Let go, meesters."
 " Steal his sister?" I said. "Why, I've been--"
 "Shet up," Anse said. "You can tell that to Squire."
 " Steal his sister?" I said. Julio broke from the men and sprang at me
again, but the marshal met him and they struggled until the other two
pinioned his arms again. Anse released him, panting.
 "You durn furriner," he said. "I've a good mind to take you up too, for
assault and battery." He turned to me again. "Will you come peaceable, or
do I handcuff you?" "I'll come peaceable," I said. "Anything, just so I can
find someone--do something with-- Stole his sister," I said. "Stole his--"
 " I've warned you," Anse said. "He aims to charge you with meditated
criminal assault. Here, you, make that gal shut up that noise."
 "Oh," I said. Then I began to laugh. Two more boys with plastered heads
and round eyes came out of the bushes, buttoning shirts that had already
dampened onto their shoulders and arms, and I tried to stop the laughter,
but I couldn't.
 "Watch him, Anse, he's crazy, I believe."
 "I'll h-have to qu-quit," I said. "It'll stop in a mu-minute. The other time
it said ah ah ah," I said, laughing. "Let me sit down a while." I sat down,
they watching me, and the little girl with her streaked face and the gnawed
looking loaf, and the water swif and peaceful below the path. After a while
the laughter ran out. But my throat wouldn't quit trying to laugh, like
retching after your stomach is empty.
 "Whoa, now," Anse said. "Get a grip on yourself."
 "Yes," I said, tightening my throat. There was another yellow butterfly,
like one of the sunflecks had come loose. After a while I didn't have to hold
my throat so tight. I got up. "I'm ready. Which way?"
 We followed the path, the two others watching Julio and the little girl
and the boys somewhere in the rear. The path went along the river to the
bridge. We crossed it and the tracks, people coming to the doors to look at
us and more boys materialising from somewhere until when we turned into
the main street we had quite a procession. Before the drug store stood an
auto, a big one, but I didn't recognise them until Mrs Bland said,
 " Why, Quentin! Quentin Compson!" Then I saw Gerald, and Spoade in
the back seat, sitting on the back of his neck. And Shreve. I didn't know the
two girls.
 "Quentin Compson!" Mrs Bland said.
 " Good afternoon," I said, raising my hat. "I'm under arrest. I'm sorry I
didn't get your note. Did Shreve tell you?"
 "Under arrest?" Shreve said. "Excuse me," he said. He heaved himself
up and climbed over their feet and got out. He had on a pair of my flannel
pants, like a glove. I didn't remember forgetting them. I didn't remember
how many chins Mrs Bland had, either. The prettiest girl was with Gerald
in front, too. They watched me through veils, with a kind of delicate horror.
"Who's under arrest?" Shreve said. "What's this, mister?"
 "Gerald," Mrs Bland said. "Send these people away. You get in this car,
Quentin."
 Gerald got out. Spoade hadn't moved.
 "What's he done, Cap?" he said. "Robbed a hen house?"
 "I warn you," Anse said. "Do you know the prisoner?"
 "Know him," Shreve said. "Look here--"
 "Then you can come along to the squire's. You'reobstructing justice.
Come along." He shook my arm.
 "Well, good afternoon," I said. "I'm glad to have seen you all. Sorry I
couldn't be with you."
 "You, Gerald," Mrs Bland said.
 "Look here, constable," Gerald said.
 "I warn you you're interfering with an officer of the law," Anse said. "If
you've anything to say, you can come to the squire's and make cognizance
of the prisoner." We went on. Quite a procession now, Anse and I leading. I
could hear them telling them what it was, and Spoade asking questions,
and then Julio said something violently in Italian and I looked back and
saw the little girl standing at the curb, looking at me with her friendly,
inscrutable regard.
 "Git on home," Julio shouted at her. "I beat hell outa you."
 We went down the street and turned into a bit of lawn in which, set
back from the street, stood a one storey building of brick trimmed with
white. We went up the rock path to the door, where Anse halted everyone
except us and made them remain outside. We entered, a bare room
smelling of stale tobacco. There was a sheet iron stove in the center of a
wooden frame filled with sand, and a faded map on the wall and the dingy
plat of a township. Behind a scarred littered table a man with a fierce roach
of iron gray hair peered at us over steel spectacles.
 "Got him, did ye, Anse?" he said.
 "Got him, Squire."
 He opened a huge dusty book and drew it to him and dipped a foul pen
into an inkwell filled with what looked like coal dust.
 "Look here, mister," Shreve said.
 "The prisoner's name," the squire said. I told him. He wrote it slowly
into the book, the pen scratching with excruciating deliberation.
 "Look here, mister," Shreve said. "We know this fellow. We--"
 "Order in the court," Anse said.
 "Shut up, bud," Spoade said. "Let him do it his way. He's going to
anyhow."
 "Age," the squire said. I told him. He wrote that, his mouth moving as he
wrote. "Occupation." I told him. "Harvard student, hey?" he said. He
looked up at me, bowing his neck a little to see over the spectacles. His eyes
were clear and cold, like a goat's. "What are you up to, coming out here
kidnapping children?"
 "They're crazy, Squire," Shreve said. "Whoever says this boy's
kidnapping--"
 Julio moved violently. "Crazy?" he said. "Dont I catcha heem, eh? Dont
I see weetha my own eyes–-"
 "You're a liar," Shreve said. "You never--"
 "Order, order," Anse said, raising his voice.
 "You fellers shet up," the squire said. "If they dont stay quiet, turn 'em
out, Anse." They got quiet. The squire looked at Shreve, then at Spoade,
then at Gerald. "You know this young man?" he said to Spoade.
 "Yes, your honor," Spoade said. "He's just a country boy in school up
there. He dont mean any harm. I think the marshal'll find it's a mistake.
His father's a congregational minister."
 "H'm," the squire said. "What was you doing, exactly?" I told him, he
watching me with his cold, pale eyes. "How about it, Anse?"
 "Might have been," Anse said. "Them durn furriners."
 "I American," Julio said. "I gotta da pape'."
 "Where's the gal?"
 "He sent her home," Anse said.
 "Was she scared or anything?"
 "Not till Julio there jumped on the prisoner. They were just walking
along the river path, towards town. Some boys swimming told us which
way they went."
 "It's a mistake, Squire," Spoade said. "Children and dogs are always
taking up with him like that. He cant help it."
 "H'm," the squire said. He looked out of the window for a while. We
watched him. I could hear Julio scratching himself. The squire looked
back.
 "Air you satisfied the gal aint took any hurt, you, there?"
 "No hurt now," Julio said sullenly.
 "You quit work to hunt for her?"
 "Sure I quit. I run. I run like hell. Looka here, looka there, then man
tella me he seen him give her she eat. She go weetha."
 "H'm," the squire said. "Well, son, I calculate you owe Julio something
for taking him away from his work."
 "Yes, sir," I said. "How much?"
 "Dollar, I calculate."
 I gave Julio a dollar.
 "Well," Spoade said. "If that's all--I reckon he's discharged, your
honor?"
 The squire didn't look at him. "How far'd you run him, Anse?"
 "Two miles, at least. It was about two hours before we caught him."
 "H'm," the squire said. He mused a while. We watched him, his stiff
crest, the spectacles riding low on his nose. The yellow shape of the
window grew slowly across the floor, reached the wall, climbing. Dust
motes whirled and slanted. "Six dollars."
 "Six dollars?" Shreve said. "What's that for?"
 "Six dollars," the squire said. He looked at Shreve a moment, then at me
again.
 "Look here," Shreve said.
 "Shut up," Spoade said. "Give it to him, bud, and let's get out of here.
The ladies are waiting for us. You got six dollars?"
 "Yes," I said. I gave him six dollars.
 "Case dismissed," he said.
 "You get a receipt," Shreve said. "You get a signed receipt for that
money."
 The squire looked at Shreve mildly. "Case dismissed," he said without
raising his voice.
 "I'll be damned--" Shreve said.
 "Come on here," Spoade said, taking his arm. "Good afternoon, Judge.
Much obliged." As we passed out the door Julio's voice rose again, violent,
then ceased. Spoade was looking at me, his brown eyes quizzical, a little
cold. "Well, bud, I reckon you'll do your girl chasing in Boston after this."
 "You damned fool," Shreve said. "What the hell do you mean anyway,
straggling off here, fooling with these damn wops?"
 "Come on," Spoade said. "They must be getting impatient."
 Mrs Bland was talking to them. They were Miss Holmes and Miss
Daingerfield and they quit listening to her and looked at me again with that
delicate and curious horror, their veils turned back upon their little white
noses and their eyes fleeing and mysterious beneath the veils.
 "Quentin Compson," Mrs Bland said. "What would your mother say. A
young man naturally gets into scrapes, but to be arrested on foot by a
country policeman. What did they think he'd done, Gerald?"
 "Nothing," Gerald said.
 "Nonsense. What was it, you, Spoade?"
 "He was trying to kidnap that little dirty girl, but they caught him in
time," Spoade said.
 "Nonsense," Mrs Bland said, but her voice sort of died away and she
stared at me for a moment, and the girls drew their breaths in with a soft
concerted sound. "Fiddlesticks," Mrs Bland said briskly. "If that isn't just
like these ignorant lowclass Yankees. Get in, Quentin."
 Shreve and I sat on two small collapsible seats. Gerald cranked the car
and got in and we started.
 "Now, Quentin, you tell me what all this foolishness is about," Mrs
Bland said. I told them, Shreve hunched and furious on his little seat and
Spoade sitting again on the back of his neck beside Miss Daingerfield.
 "And the joke is, all the time Quentin had us all fooled," Spoade said.
"All the time we thought he was the model youth that anybody could trust a
daughter with, until the police showed him up at his nefarious work."
 "Hush up, Spoade," Mrs Bland said. We drove down the street and
crossed the bridge and passed the house where the pink garment hung in
the window. "That's what you get for not reading my note. Why didn't you
come and get it? Mr MacKenzie says he told you it was there."
 "Yessum. I intended to, but I never went back to the room."
 "You'd have let us sit there waiting I dont know how long, if it hadn't
been for Mr MacKenzie. When he said you hadn't come back, that left an
extra place, so we asked him to come. We're very glad to have you anyway,
Mr MacKenzie." Shreve said nothing. His arms were folded and he glared
straight ahead past Gerald's cap. It was a cap for motoring in England. Mrs
Bland said so. We passed that house, and three others, and another yard
where the little girl stood by the gate. She didn't have the bread now, and
her face looked like it had been streaked with coaldust. I waved my hand,
but she made no reply, only her head turned slowly as the car passed,
following us with her unwinking gaze. Then we ran beside the wall, our
shadows running along the wall, and after a while we passed a piece of torn
newspaper lying beside the road and I began to laugh again. I could feel it
in my throat and I looked off into the trees where the afternoon slanted,
thinking of afternoon and of the bird and the boys in swimming. But still I
couldn't stop it and then I knew that if I tried too hard to stop it I'd be
crying and I thought about how I'd thought about I could not be a virgin,
with so many of them walking along in the shadows and whispering with
their soft girlvoices lingering in the shadowy places and the words coming
out and perfume and eyes you could feel not see, but if it was that simple to
do it wouldn't be anything and if it wasn't anything, what was I and then
Mrs Bland said, "Quentin? Is he sick, Mr MacKenzie?" and then Shreve's
fat hand touched my knee and Spoade began talking and I quit trying to
stop it.
 "If that hamper is in his way, Mr MacKenzie, move it over on your side. I
brought a hamper of wine because I think young gentlemen should drink
wine, although my father, Gerald's grandfather " ever do that Have you
ever done that In the gray darkness a little light her hands locked about
 "They do, when they can get it," Spoade said. "Hey, Shreve?" her knees
her face looking at the sky the smell of honeysuckle upon her face and
throat
 "Beer, too," Shreve said. His hand touched my knee again. I moved my
knee again. like a thin wash of lilac colored paint talking about him
bringing
 "You're not a gentleman," Spoade said. him between us until the shape
of her blurred not with dark
 "No. I'm Canadian," Shreve said. talking about him the oar blades
winking him along winking the Cap made for motoring in England and
all time rushing beneath and they two blurred within the other forever
more he had been in the army had killed men
 "I adore Canada," Miss Daingerfield said. "I think it's marvellous."
 "Did you ever drink perfume?" Spoade said. with one hand he could lift
her to his shoulder and run with her running Running
 "No," Shreve said. running the beast with two backs and she blurred in
the winking oars running the swine of Euboeleus running coupled within
how many Caddy
 "Neither did I," Spoade said. I dont know too many there was
something terrible in me terrible in me Father I have committed Have you
ever done that We didnt we didnt do that did we do that
 "and Gerald's grandfather always picked his own mint before breakfast,
while the dew was still on it. He wouldn't even let old Wilkie touch it do
you remember Gerald but always gathered it himself and made his own
julep. He was as crotchety about his julep as an old maid, measuring
everything by a recipe in his head. There was only one man he ever gave
that recipe to; that was " we did how can you not know it if youll just
wait Ill tell you how it was it was a crime we did a terrible crime it cannot
be hid you think it can but wait Poor Quentin youve never done that
have you and Ill tell you how it was Ill tell Father then itll have to be
because you love Father then well have to go away amid the pointing and
the horror the clean flame Ill make you say we did Im stronger than you
Ill make you know we did you thought it was them but it was me listen
I fooled you all the time it was me you thought I was in the house where
that damn honeysuckle trying not to think the swing the cedars the secret
surges the breathing locked drinking the wild breath the yes Yes Yes yes
 "never be got to drink wine himself, but he always said that a hamper
what book did you read that in the one where Gerald's rowing suit of wine
was a necessary part of any gentlemen's picnic basket" did you love them
Caddy did you love them When they touched me I died
 one minute she was standing there the next he was yelling and pulling at
her dress they went into the hall and up the stairs yelling and shoving at
her up the stairs to the bathroom door and stopped her back against the
door and her arm across her face yelling and trying to shove her into the
bathroom when she came in to supper T. P. was feeding him he started
again just whimpering at first until she touched him then he yelled she
stood there her eyes like cornered rats then I was running in the gray
darkness it smelled of rain and all flower scents the damp warm air
released and crickets sawing away in the grass pacing me with a small
travelling island of silence Fancy watched me across the fence blotchy like
a quilt on a line I thought damn that nigger he forgot to feed her again I
ran down the hill in that vacuum of crickets like a breath travelling across a
mirror she was lying in the water her head on the sand spit the water
flowing about her hips there was a little more light in the water her skirt
half saturated flopped along her flanks to the waters motion in heavy
ripples going nowhere renewed themselves of their own movement I stood
on the bank I could smell the honeysuckle on the water gap the air seemed
to drizzle with honeysuckle and with the rasping of crickets a substance
you could feel
on the flesh
is Benjy still crying
I dont know yes I dont know
poor Benjy
I sat down on the bank the crass was damn a little then I found my shoes
wet
get out of that water are you crazy
but she didnt move her face was a white blur framed out of the blur of the
sand by her hair
get out now
she sat up then she rose her skirt flopped against her draining she climbed
the bank her clothes flopping sat down
why dont you wring it out do you want to catch cold
yes
the water sucked and gurgled across the sand spit and on in the dark
among the willows across the shallow the water rippled like a piece of cloth
holding still a little light as water does
hes crossed all the oceans all around the world
then she talked about him clasping her wet knees her face tilted back in the
gray light the smell of honeysuckle there was a light in mothers room and
in Benjys where T. P. was putting him to bed
do you love him
her hand came out I didnt move it fumbled down my arm and she held my
hand flat against her chest her heart thudding
no no
did he make you then he made you do it let him he was stronger than you
and he tomorrow Ill kill him I swear I will father neednt know until
afterward and then you and I nobody need ever know we can take my
school money we can cancel my matriculation Caddy you hate him dont
you dont you
she held my hand against her chest her heart thudding I turned and caught
her arm
Caddy you hate him dont you
she moved my hand up against her throat her heart was hammering there
poor Quentin
her face looked at the sky it was low so low that all smells and sounds of
night seemed to have been crowded down like under a slack tent especially
the honeysuckle it had got into my breathing it was on her face and throat
like paint her blood pounded against my hand I was leaning on my other
arm it began to jerk and jump and I had to pant to get any air at all out of
that thick gray honeysuckle
yes I hate him I would die for him Ive already died for him I die for him
over and over again everytime this goes
when I lifted my hand I could still feel crisscrossed twigs and grass burning
into the palm
poor Quentin
she leaned back on her arms her hands locked about her knees
youve never done that have you
what done what
that what I have what I did
yes yes lots of times with lots of girls
then I was crying her hand touched me again and I was crying against her
damp blouse then she lying on her back looking past my head into the sky I
could see a rim of white under her irises I opened my knife do you
remember the day damuddy died when you sat down in the water in your
drawers
yes
I held the point of the knife at her throat
it wont take but a second just a second then I can do mine I can do mine
then
all right can you do yours by yourself
yes the blades long enough Benjys in bed by now
yes
it wont take but a second Ill try not to hurt
all right
will you close your eyes
no like this youll have to push it harder
touch your hand to it
but she didnt move her eyes were wide open looking past my head at the
sky
Caddy do you remember how Dilsey fussed at you because your drawers
were muddy
dont cry
Im not crying Caddy
push it are you going to
do you want me to
yes push it
touch your hand to it
dont cry poor Quentin
but I couldnt stop she held my head against her damp hard breast I could
hear her heart going firm and slow now not hammering and the water
gurgling among the willows in the dark and waves of honeysuckle coming
up the air my arm and shoulder were twisted under me
what is it what are you doing
her muscles gathered I sat up
its my knife I dropped it
she sat up
what time is it
I dont know
she rose to her feet I fumbled along the ground
Im going let it go
to the house
I could feel her standing there I could smell her damp clothes feeling her
there
its right here somewhere
let it go you can find it tomorrow come on
wait a minute Ill find it
are you afraid to
here it is it was right here all the time
was it come on
I got up and followed we went up the hill the crickets hushing before us
its funny how you can sit down and drop something and have to hunt all
around for it
the gray it was gray with dew slanting up into the gray sky
then the trees beyond
damn that honeysuckle I wish it would stop
you used to like it
we crossed the crest and went on toward the trees she walked into me she
gave over a little the ditch was a black scar on the gray grass she walked
into me again she looked at me and gave over we reached the ditch
lets go this way
what for
lets see if you can still see Nancys bones I havens thought
to look in a long time have you
it was matted with vines and briers dark
they were right here you cant tell whether you see them or not can you
stop Quentin
come on
the ditch narrowed closed she turned toward the trees
stop Quentin
Caddy
I got in front of her again
Caddy
stop it
I held her
Im stronger than you
she was motionless hard unyielding but still
I wont fight stop youd better stop
Caddy dont Caddy
it wont do any good dont you know it wont let me go the honeysuckle
drizzled and drizzled I could hear the crickets watching us in a circle she
moved back went around me on toward the trees
you go on back to the house you neednt come
I went on
why dont you go on back to the house
damn that honeysuckle
we reached the fence she crawled through I crawled through when I rose
from stooping he was coming out of the trees into the gray toward us
coming toward us tall and flat and still even moving like he was still she
went to him
this is Quentin Im wet Im wet all over you dont have to if you dont want to
their shadows one shadow her head rose it was above his on the sky higher
their two heads you dont have to if you dont want to then not two heads
the darkness smelled of rain of damp grass and leaves the gray light
drizzling like rain the honeysuckle coming up in damp waves I could see
her face a blur against his shoulder he held her in one arm like she was no
bigger than a child he extended his hand
glad to know you
we shook hands then we stood there her shadow high
against his shadow one shadow
whatre you going to do Quentin
walk a while I think Ill go through the woods to the road and come back
through town
I turned away going
goodnight
Quentin
I stopped
what do you want
in the woods the tree frogs were going smelling rain in the air they sounded
like toy music boxes that were hard to turn and the honeysuckle
come here
what do you want
come here Quentin
I went back she touched my shoulder leaning down her shadow the blur of
her face leaning down from his high shadow I drew back
look out
you go on home
Im not sleepy Im going to take a walk
wait for me at the branch
Im going for a walk
Ill be there soon wait for me you wait
no Im going through the woods
I didnt look back the tree frogs didnt pay me any mind the gray light like
moss in the trees drizzling but still it wouldnt rain after a while I turned
went back to the edge of the woods as soon as I got there I began to smell
honeysuckle again I could see the lights on the courthouse clock and the
glare of town the square on the sky and the dark willows along the branch
and the light in mothers windows the light still on in Benjys room and I
stooped through the fence and went across the pasture running I ran in the
gray grass among the crickets the honeysuckle getting stronger and
stronger and the smell of water then I could see the water the color of gray
honeysuckle I lay down on the bank with my face close to the ground so I
couldnt smell the honeysuckle I couldnt smell it then and I lay there feeling
the earth going through my clothes listening to the water and after a while
I wasnt breathing so hard and I lay there thinking that if I didnt move my
face I wouldnt have to breathe hard and smell it and then I wasnt thinking
about anything at all she came along the bank and stopped I didnt move
its late you go on home
what
you go on home its late
all right
her clothes rustled I didnt move they stopped rustling
are you going in like I told you
I didnt hear anything
Caddy
yes I will if you want me to I will
I sat up she was sitting on the ground her hands clasped about her knee
go on to the house like I told you
yes Ill do anything you want me to anything yes
she didnt even look at me I caught her shoulder and shook her hard
you shut up
I shook her
you shut up you shut up
yes
she lifted her face then I saw she wasnt even looking at me at all I could see
that white rim
get up
I pulled her she was limp I lifted her to her feet
go on now
was Benjy still crying when you left
go on
we crossed the branch the roof came in sight then the windows upstairs
hes asleep now
I had to stop and fasten the gate she went on in the gray light the smell of
rain and still it wouldnt rain and honey- suckle beginning to come from the
garden fence beginning she went into the shadow I could hear her feet
then
Caddy
I stopped at the steps I couldnt hear her feet
Caddy
I heard her feet then my hand touched her not warm not cool just still her
clothes a little damp still
do you love him now
not breathing except slow like far away breathing
Caddy do you love him now
I dont know
outside the gray light the shadows of things like dead
things in stagnant water
I wish you were dead
do you you coming in now
are you thinking about him now
I dont know
tell me what youre thinking about tell me
stop stop Quentin
you shut up you shut up you hear me you shut up are you going to shut up
all right I will stop well make too much noise
Ill kill you do you hear
lets go out to the swing theyll hear you here
Im not crying do you say Im crying
no hush now well wake Benjy up
you go on into the house go on now
I am dont cry Im bad anyway you cant help it
theres a curse on us its not our fault is it our fault
hush come on and go to bed now
you cant make me theres a curse on us
finally I saw him he was just going into the barbershop he looked out I
went on and waited
Ive been looking for you two or three days
you wanted to see me
Im going to see you
he rolled the cigarette quickly with about two motions he struck the match
with his thumb
we cant talk here suppose I meet you somewhere
Ill come to your room are you at the hotel
no thats not so good you know that bridge over the creek in there back of
yes all right
at one oclock right
yes
I turned away
Im obliged to you
look
I stopped looked back
she all right
he looked like he was made out of bronze his khaki shirt
she need me for anything now
Ill be there at one
she heard me tell T. P. to saddle Prince at one oclock she kept watching me
not eating much she came too
what are you going to do
nothing cant I go for a ride if I want to
youre going to do something what is it
none of your business whore whore
T. P. had Prince at the side door
I wont want him Im going to walk
I went down the drive and out the gate I turned into the lane then I ran
before I reached the bridge I saw him leaning on the rail the horse was
hitched in the woods he looked over his shoulder then he turned his back
he didnt look up until I came onto the bridge and stopped he had a piece of
bark in his hands breaking pieces from it and dropping them over the rail
into the water
I came to tell you to leave town
he broke a piece of bark deliberately dropped it carefully into the water
watched it float away
I said you must leave town
he looked at me
did she send you to me
I say you must go not my father not anybody I say it
listen save this for a while I want to know if shes all right have they been
bothering her up there
thats something you dont need to trouble yourself about
then I heard myself saying Ill give you until sundown to leave town
he broke a piece of bark and dropped it into the water then he laid the bark
on the rail and rolled a cigarette with those two swift motions spun the
match over the rail
what will you do if I dont leave
Ill kill you dont think that just because I look like a kid to you
the smoke flowed in two jets from his nostrils across his face
how old are you
I began to shake my hands were on the rail I thought if I hid them hed
know why
Ill give you until tonight
listen buddy whets your name Benjys the natural isnt he
Quentin
my mouth said it I didnt say it at all
Quentin
he raked the cigarette ash carefully off against the rail he did it slowly and
carefully like sharpening a Pencil my hands had quit shaking
listen no good taking it so hard its not your fault kid it would have been
some other fellow
did you ever have a sister did you
no but theyre all bitches
I hit him my open hand beat the impulse to shut it to his face his hand
moved as fast as mine the cigarette went over the rail I swung with the
other hand he caught it too before the cigarette reached the water he held
both my wrists in the same hand his other hand flicked to his armpit under
his coat behind him the sun slanted and a bird sing ing somewhere beyond
the sun we looked at one another while the bird singing he turned my
hands loose
look here
he took the bark from the rail and dropped it into the water it bobbed up
the current took it floated away his hand lay on the rail holding the pistol
loosely we waited
you cant hit it now
no
it floated on it was quite still in the woods I heard the bird again and the
water afterward the pistol came up he didnt aim at all the bark disappeared
then pieces of it floated up spreading he hit two more of them pieces of
bark no bigger than silver dollars
thats enough I guess
he swung the cylinder out and blew into the barrel a thin wisp of smoke
dissolved he reloaded the three chambers shut the cylinder he handed it to
me butt first
what for I wont try to beat that
youll need it from what you said Im giving you this one because youve seen
what itll do
to hell with your gun
I hit him I was still trying to hit him long after he was holding my wrists
but I still tried then it was like I was looking at him through a piece of
colored glass I could hear my blood and then I could see the sky again and
branches against it and the sun slanting through them and he holding me
on my feet
did you hit me
I couldnt hear
what
yes how do you feel
all right let go
he let me go I leaned against the rail
do you feel all right
let me alone Im all right
can you make it home all right
go on let me alone
youd better not try to walk take my horse
no you go on
you can hang the reins on the pommel and turn him loose hell go back to
the stable
let me alone you go on and let me alone
I leaned on the rail looking at the water I heard him untie the horse and
ride off and after a while I couldnt hear anything but the water and then
the bird again I left the bridge and sat down with my back against a tree
and leaned my head against the tree and shut my eyes a Patch of sun came
through and fell across my eyes and I moved a little further around the tree
I heard the bird again and the water and then everything sort of rolled
away and I didnt feel anything at all I felt almost good after all those days
and the nights with honeysuckle coming up out of the darkness into my
room where I was trying to sleep even when after a while I knew that he
hadnt hit me that he had lied about that for her sake too and that I had just
passed out like a girl but even that didnt matter anymore and I sat there
against the tree with little flecks of sunlight brushing across my face like
yellow leaves on a twig listening to the water and not thinking about
anything at all even when I heard the horse coming fast I sat there with my
eyes closed and heard its feet bunch scuttering the hissing sand and feet
running and her hard running hands
fool fool are you hurt
I opened my eyes her hands running on my face
I didnt know which way until I heard the pistol I didnt know where I didnt
think he and you running off slipping I didnt think he would have
she held my face between her hands bumping my head against the tree
stop stop that
I caught her wrists
quit that quit it
I knew he wouldnt I knew he wouldnt
she tried to bump my head against the tree
I told him never to speak to me again I told him
she tried to break her wrists free
let me go
stop it Im stronger than you stop it now
let me go Ive got to catch him and ask his let me go Quentin please let me
go let me go
all at once she quit her wrists went lax
yes I can tell him I can make him believe anytime I can make him
Caddy
she hadnt hitched Prince he was liable to strike out for home if the notion
took him
anytime he will believe me
do you love him Caddy
do I what
she looked at me then everything emptied out of her eyes
and they looked like the eyes in statues blank and unseeing and serene
put your hand against my throat
she took my hand and held it flat against her throat
now say his name
Dalton Ames
I felt the first surge of blood there it surged in strong accelerating beats
say it again
her face looked off into the trees where the sun slanted and where the bird
say it again
Dalton Ames
her blood surged steadily beating and beating against my hand
 It dept on running for a long time, but my face felt cold and sort of
dead, and my eye, and the cut place on my finger was smarting again. I
could hear Shreve working the pump, then he came back with the basin
and a round blob of twilight wobbling in it, with a yellow edge like a fading
balloon, then my reflection. I tried to see my face in it.
 "Has it stopped?" Shreve said. "Give me the rag." He tried to take it from
my hand.
 "Look out," I said. "I can do it. Yes, it's about stopped now." I dipped the
rag again, breaking the balloon. The rag stained the water. "I wish I had a
clean one."
 "You need a piece of beefsteak for that eye," Shreve said. "Damn if you
wont have a shiner tomorrow. The son of a bitch," he said.
 "Did I hurt him any?" I wrung out the handkerchief and tried to clean
the blood off of my vest.
 "You cant get that off," Shreve said. "You'll have to send it to the
cleaner's. Come on, hold it on your eye, why dont you.
 "I can get some of it off," I said. But I wasn't doing much good. "What
sort of shape is my collar in?"
 "I dont know," Shreve said. "Hold it against your eye. Here."
 "Look out," I said. "I can do it. Did I hurt him any?"
 "You may have hit him. I may have looked away just then or blinked or
something. He boxed the hell out of you. He boxed you all over the place.
What did you want to fight him with your fists for? You goddam fool. How
do you feel?"
 "I feel fine," I said. "I wonder if I can get something to clean my vest."
 "Oh, forget your damn clothes. Does your eye hurt?"
 "I feel fine," I said. Everything was sort of violet and still, the sky green
paling into gold beyond the gable of the house and a plume of smoke rising
from the chimney without any wind. I heard the pump again. A man was
filling a pail, watching us across his pumping shoulder. A woman crossed
the door, but she didn't look out. I could hear a cow lowing somewhere.
 "Come on," Shreve said. "Let your clothes alone and put that rag on your
eye. I'll send your suit out first thing tomorrow."
 "All right. I'm sorry I didn't bleed on him a little, at least."
 "Son of a bitch," Shreve said. Spoade came out of the house, talking to
the woman I reckon, and crossed the yard. He looked at me with his cold,
quizzical eyes.
 "Well, bud," he said, looking at me, "I'll be damned if you dont go to a
lot of trouble to have your fun. Kidnapping, then fighting. What do you do
on your holidays? burn houses?"
 "I'm all right," I said. "What did Mrs Bland say?"
 "She's giving Gerald hell for bloodying you up. She'll give you hell for
letting him, when she sees you. She dont object to the fighting, it's the
blood that annoys her. I think you lost caste with her a little by not holding
your blood better. How do you feel?"
 "Sure," Shreve said. "If you cant be a Bland, the next best thing is to
commit adultery with one or get drunk and fight him, as the case may be."
 "Quite right," Spoade said. "But I didn't know Quentin was drunk."
 "He wasn't," Shreve said. "Do you have to be drunk to want to hit that
son of a bitch?"
 "Well, I think I'd have to be pretty drunk to try it, after seeing how
Quentin came out. Where'd he learn to box?"
 "He's been going to Mike's every day, over in town," I said.
 "He has?" Spoade said. "Did you know that when you hit him?"
 "I dont know," I said. "I guess so. Yes."
 "Wet it again," Shreve said. "Want some fresh water?"
 "This is all right," I said. I dipped the cloth again and held it to my eye.
"Wish I had something to clean my vest." Spoade was still watching me.
 "Say," he said. "What did you hit him for? What was it he said?"
 "I dont know. I dont know why I did."
 "The first I knew was when you jumped up all of a sudden and said, 'Did
you ever have a sister? did you?' and when he said No, you hit him. I
noticed you kept on looking at him, but you didn't seem to be paying any
attention to what anybody was saying until you jumped up and asked him
if he had any sisters."
 "Ah, he was blowing off as usual," Shreve said, "about his women. You
know: like he does, before girls, so they dont know exactly what he's saying.
All his damn innuendo and lying and a lot of stuff that dont make sense
even. Telling us about some wench that he made a date with to meet at a
dance hall in Atlantic City and stood her up and went to the hotel and went
to bed and how he lay there being sorry for her waiting on the pier for him,
without him there to give her what she wanted. Talking about the body's
beauty and the sorry ends thereof and how tough women have it, without
anything else they can do except lie on their backs. Leda lurking in the
bushes, whimpering and moaning for the swan, see. The son of a bitch. I'd
hit him myself. Only I'd grabbed up her damn hamper of wine and done it
if it had been me."
 "Oh," Spoade said, "the champion of dames. Bud, you excite not only
admiration, but horror." He looked at me, cold and quizzical. "Good God,"
he said.
 "I'm sorry I hit him," I said. "Do I look too bad to go back and get it over
with?"
 "Apologies, hell," Shreve said. "Let them go to hell. We're going to
town."
 "He ought to go back so they'll know he fights like a gentleman," Spoade
said. "Gets licked like one, I mean."
 "Like this?" Shreve said. "With his clothes all over blood?"
 "Why, all right," Spoade said. "You know best."
 "He cant go around in his undershirt," Shreve said. "He's not a senior
yet. Come on, let's go to town."
 "You needn't come," I said. "You go on back to the picnic."
 "Hell with them," Shreve said. "Come on here."
 "What'll I tell them?" Spoade said. "Tell them you and Quentin had a
fight too?"
 "Tell them nothing," Shreve said. "Tell her her option expired at sunset.
Come on, Quentin. I'll ask that woman where the nearest interurban--"
 "No," I said. "I'm not going back to town."
 Shreve stopped, looking at me. Turning his glasses looked like small
yellow moons.
 "What are you going to do?"
 "I'm not going back to town yet. You go on back to the picnic. Tell them I
wouldn't come back because my clothes were spoiled."
 "Look here," he said. "What are you up to?"
 "Nothing. I'm all right. You and Spoade go on back. I'll see you
tomorrow." I went on across the yard, toward the road.
 "Do you know where the station is?" Shreve said.
 "I'll find it. I'll see you all tomorrow. Tell Mrs Bland I'm sorry I spoiled
her party." They stood watching me. I went around the house. A rock path
went down to the road. Roses grew on both sides of the path. I went
through the gate, onto the road. It dropped downhill, toward the woods,
and I could make out the auto beside the road. I went up the hill. The light
increased as I mounted, and before I reached the top I heard a car. It
sounded far away across the twilight and I stopped and listened to it. I
couldn't make out the auto any longer, but Shreve was standing in the road
before the house, looking up the hill. Behind him the yellow light lay like a
wash of paint on the roof of the house. I lifted my hand and went on over
the hill, listening to the car. Then the house was gone and I stopped in the
green and yellow light and heard the car growing louder and louder, until
just as it began to die away it ceased all together. I waited until I heard it
start again. Then I went on.
 As I descended the light dwindled slowly, yet at the same time without
altering its quality, as if I and not light were changing, decreasing, though
even when the road ran into trees you could have read a newspaper. Pretty
soon I came to a lane. I turned into it. It was closer and darker than the
road, but when it came out at the trolley stop--another wooden marquee--
the light was still unchanged. After the lane it seemed brighter, as though I
had walked through night in the lane and come out into morning again.
Pretty soon the car came. I got on it, they turning to look at my eye, and
found a seat on the left side.
 The lights were on in the car, so while we ran between trees I couldn't
see anything except my own face and a woman across the aisle with a hat
sitting right on top of her head, with a broken feather in it, but when we
ran out of the trees I could see the twilight again, that quality of light as if
time really had stopped for a while, with the sun hanging just under the
horizon, and then we passed the marquee where the old man had been
eating out of the sack, and the road going on under the twilight, into
twilight and the sense of water peaceful and swift beyond. Then the car
went on, the draft building steadily up in the open door until it was
drawing steadily through the car with the odor of summer and darkness
except honeysuckle. Honeysuckle was the saddest odor of all, I think. I
remember lots of them. Wistaria was one. On the rainy days when Mother
wasn't feeling quite bad enough to stay away from the windows we used to
play under it. When Mother stayed in bed Dilsey would put old clothes on
us and let us go out in the rain because she said rain never hurt young
folks. But if Mother was up we always began by playing on the porch until
she said we were making too much noise, then we went out and played
under the wisteria frame.
 This was where I saw the river for the last time this morning, about
here. I could feel water beyond the twilight, smell. When it bloomed in the
spring and it rained the smell was everywhere you didn't notice it so much
at other times but when it rained the smell began to come into the house at
twilight either it would rain more at twilight or there was something in the
light itself but it always smelled strongest then until I would lie in bed
thinking when will it stop when will it stop. The draft in the door smelled of
water, a damp steady breath. Sometimes I could put myself to sleep saying
that over and over until after the honeysuckle got all mixed up in it the
whole thing came to symbolis night and unrest I seemed to be lying neither
asleep nor awake looking down a long corridor of gray halflight where all
stable things had become shadowy paradoxical all I had done shadows all I
had felt suffered taking visible form antic and perverse mocking without
relevance inherent themselves with the denial of the significance they
should have affirmed thinking I was I was not who was not was not who.
 I could smell the curves of the river beyond the dusk and I saw the last
light supine and tranquil upon tideflats like pieces of broken mirror, then
beyond them lights began in the pale clear air, trembling a little like
butterflies hovering a long way off. Benjamin the child of. How he used to
sit before that mirror. Refuge unfailing in which conflict tempered silenced
reconciled. Benjamin the child of mine old age held hostage into Egypt. O
Benjamin. Dilsey said it was because Mother was too proud for him. They
come into white people's lives like that in sudden sharp black trickles that
isolate white facts for an instant in unarguable truth like under a
microscope; the rest of the time just voices that laugh when you see
nothing to laugh at, tears when no reason for tears. They will bet on the
odd or even number of mourners at a funeral. A brothel full of them in
Memphis went into a religious trance ran naked into the street. It took
three policemen to subdue one of them. Yes Jesus O good man Jesus O
that good man.
 The car stopped. I got out, with them looking at my eye. When the
trolley came it was full. I stopped on the back platform.
 "Seats up front," the conductor said. I looked into the car. There were no
seats on the left side.
 "I'm not going far," I said. "I'll just stand here."
 We crossed the river. The bridge, that is, arching slow and high into
space, between silence and nothingness where lights-- yellow and red and
green--trembled in the clear air, repeating themselves.
 "Better go up front and get a seat," the conductor said.
 "I get off pretty soon," I said. "A couple of blocks."
 I got off before we reached the postoffice. They'd all be sitting around
somewhere by now though, and then I was hearing my watch and I began
to listen for the chimes and I touched Shreve's letter through my coat, the
bitten shadows of the elms flowing upon my hand. And then as I turned
into the quad the chimes did begin and I went on while the notes came up
like ripples on a pool and passed me and went on, saying Quarter to what?
All right. Quarter to what.
 Our windows were dark. The entrance was empty. I walked close to the
left wall when I entered, but it was empty: just the stairs curving up into
shadows echoes of feet in the sad generations like light dust upon the
shadows, my feet waking them like dust, lightly to settle again.
 I could see the letter before I turned the light on, propped against a
book on the table so I would see it.
 Calling him my husband. And then Spoade said they were going
somewhere, would not be back until late, and Mrs Bland would need
another cavalier. But I would have seen him and he cannot get another car
for an hour because after six oclock. I took out my watch and listened to it
clicking away, not knowing it couldn't even lie. Then I laid it face up on the
table and took Mrs Bland's letter and tore it across and dropped the pieces
into the waste basket and took off my coat, vest, collar, tie and shirt. The tie
was spoiled too, but then niggers. Maybe a pattern of blood he could call
that the one Christ was wearing. I found the gasoline in Shreve's room and
spread the vest on the table, where it would be flat, and opened the
gasoline.
 the first car in town a girl Girl that's what Jason couldn't bear smell of
gasoline making him sick then got madder than ever because a girl Girl
had no sister but Benjamin Benjamin the child of my sorrowful if I'd just
had a mother so I could say Mother Mother It took a lot of gasoline, and
then I couldn't tell if it was still the stain or just the gasoline. It had started
the cut to smarting again so when I went to wash I hung the vest on a chair
and lowered the light cord so that the bulb would be drying the splotch. I
washed my face and hands, but even then I could smell it within the soap
stinging, constricting the nostrils a little. Then I opened the bag and took
the shirt and collar and tie out and put the bloody ones in and closed the
bag, and dressed. While I was brushing my hair the half hour went. But
there was until the three quarters anyway, except suppose seeing on the
rushing darkness only his own face no broken feather unless two of them
but not two like that going to Boston the same night then my face his face
for an instant across the crashing when out of darkness two lighted
windows in rigid fleeing Being crash gone his face and mine just I see saw
did I see not goodbye the marquee empty of eating the road empty in
darkness in silence the bridge arching into silence darkness sleep the
water peaceful and swift not goodbye
 I turned out the light and went into my bedroom, out of the gasoline but
I could still smell it. I stood at the window the curtains moved slow out of
the darkness touching my face like someone breathing asleep, breathing
slow into the darkness again, leaving the touch. After they had gone up
stairs Mother lay back in her chair, the camphor handker- chief to her
mouth. Father hadn't moved he still sat beside her holding her hand the
bellowing hammering away like no place for it in silence When I was
little there was a picture in one of our books, a dark place into which a
single weak ray of light came slanting upon two faces lifted out of the
shadow. You know what I'd do if I were King? she never was a queen or a
fairy she was always a king or a giant or a general I'd break that place
open and drag them out and I'd whip them good It was torn out, jagged
out. I was glad. I'd have to turn back to it until the dungeon was Mother
herself she and Father upward into weak light holding hands and us lost
somewhere below even them without even a ray of light. Then the
honeysuckle got into it. As soon as I turned off the light and tried to go to
sleep it would begin to come into the room in waves building and building
up until I would have to pant to get any air at all out of it until I would have
to get up and feel my way like when I was a little boy hands can see
touching in the mind shaping unseen door Door now nothing hands can
see My nose could see gasoline, the vest on the table, the door. The
corridor was still empty of all the feet in sad generations seeking water.
yet the eyes unseeing clenched like teeth not disbelieving doubting even
the absence of pain shin ankle knee the long invisible flowing of the stairrailing where a misstep in the darkness filled with sleeping Mother Father
Caddy Jason Maury door I am not afraid only Mother Father Caddy
Jason Maury getting so far ahead sleeping I will sleep fast when I door
Door door It was empty too, the pipes, the porcelain, the stained quiet
walls, the throne of contemplation. I had forgotten the glass, but I could
hands can see cooling fingers invisible swan-throat where less than
Moses rod the glass touch tentative not to drumming lean cool throat
drumming cooling the metal the glass full overfull cooling the glass the
fingers flushing sleep leaving the taste of dampened sleep in the long
silence of the throat I returned up the corridor, waking the lost feet in
whispering battalions in the silence, into the gasoline, the watch telling its
furious lie on the dark table. Then the curtains breathing out of the dark
upon my face, leaving the breathing upon my face. A quarter hour yet. And
then I'll not be. The peacefullest words. Peacefullest words. Non fui. Sum.
Fui. Non sum. Somewhere I heard bells once. Mississippi or
Massachusetts. I was. I am not. Massachusetts or Mississippi. Shreve has a
bottle in his trunk. Aren't you even going to open it Mr and Mrs Jason
Richmond Compson announce the Three times. Days. Aren't you even
going to open it marriage of their daughter Candace that liquor teaches
you to confuse the means with the end I am. Drink. I was not. Let us sell
Benjy's pasture so that Quentin may go to Harvard and I may knock my
bones together and together. I will be dead in. Was it one year Caddy said.
Shreve has a bottle in his trunk. Sir I will not need Shreve's I have sold
Benjy's pasture and I can be dead in Harvard Caddy said in the caverns and
the grottoes of the sea tumbling peacefully to the wavering tides because
Harvard is such a fine sound forty acres is no high price for a fine sound. A
fine dead sound we will swap Benjy's pasture for a fine dead sound. It will
last him a long time because he cannot hear it unless he can smell it as
soon as she came in the door he began to cry I thought all the time it
was just one of those town squirts that Father was always teasing her about
until. I didn't notice him any more than any other stranger drummer or
what thought they were army shirts until all of a sudden I knew he wasn't
thinking of me at all as a Potential source of harm but was thinking of her
when he looked at me was looking at me through her like through a Piece
of colored glass why must you meddle with me dont you know it wont do
any good I thought you'd have left that for Mother and Jason
 did Mother set Jason to spy on you I wouldn't have.
 Women only use other people's codes of honor it's because she loves
Caddy staying downstairs even when she was sick so Father couldn't kid
Uncle Maury before Jason Father said Uncle Maury was too poor a
classicist to risk the blind immortal boy in person he should have chosen
Jason because Jason would have made only the same kind of blunder
Uncle Maury himself would have made not one to get him a black eye the
Patterson boy was smaller than Jason too they sold the kites for a nickel a
piece until the trouble over finances Jason got a new partner still smaller
one small enough anyway because T. P. said Jason still treasurer but
Father said why should Uncle Maury work if he Father could support five
or six niggers that did nothing at all but sit with their feet in the oven he
certainly could board and lodge Uncle Maury now and then and lend him a
little money who kept his Father's belief in the celestial derivation of his
own species at such a fine heat then Mother would cry and say that Father
believed his people were better than hers that he was ridiculing Uncle
Maury to teach us the same thing she couldn't see that Father was teaching
us that all men are just accumulations dolls stuffed with sawdust swept up
from the trash heaps where all previous dolls had been thrown away the
sawdust flowing from what wound in what side that not for me died not. It
used to be I thought of death as a man something like Grandfather a friend
of his a kind of Private and particular friend like we used to think of
Grandfather's desk not to touch it not even to talk loud in the room where
it was I always thought of them as being together somewhere all the time
waiting for old Colonel Sartoris to come down and sit with them waiting on
a high place beyond cedar trees Colonel Sartoris was on a still higher place
looking out across at something and they were waiting for him to get done
looking at it and come down Grandfather wore his uniform and we could
hear the murmur of their voices from beyond the cedars they were always
talking and Grandfather was always right
 The three quarters began. The first note sounded, measured and
tranquil, serenely peremptory, emptying the unhurried silence for the next
one and that's it if people could only change one another forever that way
merge like a flame swirling up for an instant then blown cleanly out along
the cool eternal dark instead of Iying there trying not to think of the swing
until all cedars came to have that vivid dead smell of perfume that Benjy
hated so. Just by imagining the clump it seemed to me that I could hear
whispers secret surges smell the beating of hot blood under wild unsecret
flesh watching against red eyelids the swine untethered in pairs rushing
coupled into the sea and he we must just stay awake and see evil done for a
little while its not always and i it doesnt have to be even that long for a man
of courage and he do you consider that courage and i yes sir dont you and
he every man is the arbiter of his own virtues whether or not you consider
it courageous is of more importance than the act itself than any act
otherwise you could not be in earnest and i you dont believe i am serious
and he i think you are too serious to give me any cause for alarm you
wouldnt have felt driven to the expedient of telling me you had committed
incest otherwise and i i wasnt lying i wasnt lying and he you wanted to
sublimate a piece of natural human folly into a horror and then exorcise it
with truth and i it was to isolate her out of the loud world so that it would
have to flee us of necessity and then the sound of it would be as though it
had never been and he did you try to make her do it and i i was afraid to i
was afraid she might and then it wouldnt have done any good but if i could
tell you we did it would have been so and then the others wouldnt be so
and then the world would roar away and he and now this other you are not
lying now either but you are still blind to what is in yourself to that part of
general truth the sequence of natural events and their causes which
shadows every mans brow even benjys you are not thinking of finitude you
are contemplating an apotheosis in which a temporary state of mind will
become symmetrical above the flesh and aware both of itself and of the
flesh it will not quite discard you will not even be dead and i temporary and
he you cannot bear to think that someday it will no longer hurt you like this
now were getting at it you seem to regard it merely as an experience that
will whiten your hair overnight so to speak without altering your
appearance at all you wont do it under these conditions it will be a gamble
and the strange thing is that man who is conceived by accident and whose
every breath is a fresh cast with dice already loaded against him will not
face that final main which he knows before hand he has assuredly to face
without essaying expedients ranging all the way from violence to petty
chicanery that would not deceive a child until someday in very disgust he
risks everything on a single blind turn of a card no man ever does that
under the first fury of despair or remorse or bereavement he does it only
when he has realised that even the despair or remorse or bereavement is
not particularly important to the dark diceman and i temporary and he it is
hard believing to think that a love or a sorrow is a bond purchased without
design and which matures willynilly and is recalled without warning to be
replaced by whatever issue the gods happen to be floating at the time no
you will not do that until you come to believe that even she was not quite
worth despair perhaps and i i will never do that nobody knows what i know
and he i think youd better go on up to cambridge right away you might go
up into maine for a month you can afford it if you are careful it might be a
good thing watching pennies has healed more scars than jesus and i
suppose i realise what you believe i will realise up there next week or next
month and he then you will remember that for you to go to harvard has
been your mothers dream since you were born and no compson has ever
disappointed a lady and i temporary it will be better for me for all of us and
he every man is the arbiter of his own virtues but let no man prescribe for
another mans wellbeing and i temporary and he was the saddest word of
all there is nothing else in the world its not despair until time its not even
time until it was
 The last note sounded. At last it stopped vibrating and the darkness was
still again. I entered the sitting room and turned on the light. I put my vest
on. The gasoline was faint now, barely noticeable, and in the mirror the
stain didn't show. Not like my eye did, anyway. I put on my coat. Shreve's
letter crackled through the cloth and I took it out and examined the
address, and put it in my side pocket. Then I carried the watch into
Shreve's room and put it in his drawer and went to my room and got a
fresh handkerchief and went to the door and put my hand on the light
switch. Then I remembered I hadn't brushed my teeth, so I had to open the
bag again. I found my toothbrush and got some of Shreve's paste and went
out and brushed my teeth. I squeezed the brush as dry as I could and put it
back in the bag and shut it, and went to the door again. Before I snapped
the light out I looked around to see if there was anything else, then I saw
that I had forgotten my hat. I'd have to go by the postoffice and I'd be sure
to meet some of them, and they'd think I was a Harvard Square student
making like he was a senior. I had forgotten to brush it too, but Shreve had
a brush, so I didn't have to open the bag any more.
