Black Swans in Red Ink: Losing the Numbers Game in Gabriel Garcia 
Marquez’ Chronicle of  Death Foretold 
The normal distribution is more controversial than it sounds. In his 2007 book The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable, Nassim Nicholas Taleb calls this cornerstone of statistical analysis a “GIF: Great Intellectual Fraud,” in that it offers social scientists a misplaced confidence in their attempts to predict human behavior (xx). He proceeds to argue that the most important events in human history, from the World Wars to the invention of the Internet, are directly tied to Black Swan events, which do not operate according to the logic of bell curves. Instead, they meet three key criteria: “rarity, extreme impact, and retrospective (though not prospective) predictability” (xviii). 
	Note that these conditions hold an uncanny resemblance to some of the most desirable aspects of literary plot. Marie-Laure Ryan notes that “curiosity” (related to rarity), “suspense” (an outgrowth of impact), and “surprise” (a direct result of prospective unpredictability) are “standard narrative effects” which “rely on proven principles of efficient narrative design” (63). As for the Black Swan’s condition of retrospective predictability, one ought to consider the timeless distaste for deus ex machina, which Ryan herself decisively designates as a “cheap plot trick.” The use of an unexpected power or event to resolve a seemingly hopeless situation is unsatisfying precisely because it fails to let us look back and consider causality, as we would naturally do in our efforts to explain real Black Swan events.
In any case, while we might not always enjoy living through Black Swans, we certainly seem to enjoy reading about their occurrences, whether in fiction or nonfiction. Nonetheless, for the thirteen years it has existed in public discourse, Black Swan theory has not seemed to make any significant inroads into the field of literary analysis.
Let’s change that.
Numbers have a haunting presence in Gabriel Garcia Marquez’ Chronicle of a Death Foretold. From the price games of Bayardo San Roman to the gruesome enumerations of Santiago Nasar’s stab wounds, the urge to quantify and construct order lurks in the shadows of the novel’s greatest tragedies. Taleb’s Black Swan theory holds that this urge is a common yet destructive human behavior, and that the best approach towards life’s randomness involves a keen “focus on antiknowledge, or what we do not know” (xxi). For three characters in Marquez’ Chronicle––the anonymous narrator, Angela Vicario, and the investigating magistrate––this approach manifests itself as a passionate literary impulse which does not necessarily seek to construct order so much as reflect on chaos. As such, through the lens of Black Swan Theory, Chronicle offers us insight into how literature becomes the coping mechanism for life’s randomness when quantitative perspectives fail.
Marquez offers us a few very vivid passages that capture the painful power of numbers over characters’ minds and actions. Take Bayardo San Roman’s uncanny talent with predicting prices; when Santiago Nasar attempts to “calculate the expenses of [Bayardo and Angela’s] wedding” and presents his figure to Bayardo, Bayardo replies, “When it’s all over, it will be twice that” (42). The next day, “forty-five minutes before he died, [Santiago] ascertained that Bayardo San Roman’s prediction had been exact” (43). Earlier on, we see Bayardo use this talent for more antagonistic purposes, when he attempts to outbid the widower Xius and buy his home to please Angela. Early in the discussion, Xius firmly maintains that his home, with its sentimental attachment to his dead wife, “has no price,” but a cruelly insistent Bayardo ups the ante until he eventually brings “ten bundles of thousand-peso notes with the printed bands of the State Bank still on them. The widower Xius died two months later” (36-37). Bayardo’s attempts at quantifying human value are destructive, perhaps even self-destructive, feeding into what the narrator describes as a “hidden tension” which makes him seem “like a very sad man” (28). Perhaps his numerical outlook undergirds his strict adherence to marriage protocol or his decision to keep Angela’s letters unopened, carrying with him that silent quantity of “two thousand” envelopes (95). In any case, as numbers guide him, they also haunt his actions and attitudes. 
Moreover, numbers haunt the detailed description of Santiago Nasar’s autopsy. With unrelenting, ironic detail, Marquez walks us through “seven” fatal wounds––“two deep cuts on the anterior” liver, “four incisions in the stomach,” “one” perforating the “kidney––along with “six other, lesser perforations,” “two horizontal cuts,” and, in the “morass of gastric contents,” “a medal of gold [he] swallowed at the age of four” (75). We learn from the report that “the encephalic mass weighed sixty grams more than that of a normal Englishman” (the normal distribution returns!) and, shockingly, “that the cause of death had been a massive hemorrhage brought on by any one of the seven major wounds” (76). These tallies are not simply futile in terms of their conclusions, but destructive to the very appearance of his corpse, which, according to the original murder report, “looked like a stigma of the crucified Christ” (76). The search for quantifiable answers leads not to justice against the Vicario brothers but rather injustice against the victim, as Placida Linero loses the recognizable remnants of her son for the sake of a trivial numbers game.
The most important yet subtle presence of insidious mathematics lies in the collective responsibility of the town in enabling Nasar’s murder. In the aftermath of the tragedy, they ponder their guilt as bystanders:
Our daily conduct, dominated then by so many linear habits, had suddenly begun to spin around a single common anxiety. The cocks of dawn would catch us trying to give order to the chain of many chance events that had made absurdity possible. (96)
Peppered with geometric and probabilistic language, this passage gives us insight into how the quantitative mindset fails to resolve the town’s anguish. The transition from linear to rotational thoughts implies that their methods of seeking order lead nowhere. Furthermore, consider that independent events are one of the major conditions for the kind of randomness from which normal distributions emerge (Taleb 261). This town does not have the luxury of such randomness. The probabilities that any given citizen would have stepped in to stop the Vicario brothers were not independent, but rather wholly dependent on the rest of the town, leading to this guilty “chain of many chance events” that blurs with the relentless passage of time.
However, twenty-seven years after the murder, our anonymous narrator returns to his home town to write this novel and “put together the broken mirror of memory back from so many scattered shards” (6). His reflection, equal parts literary and journalistic, is the silent, overarching solution to the pain, which captures the human condition and the facts of the case without actively trying to find sense in it. The most obvious manifestation of this goal is in the central irony of the novel’s title; despite being called a Chronicle, the story is not at all told chronologically. Its critically acclaimed  “fragmentation” and “indecipherable artifice,” as noted by John Christie, are more honest and satisfying depictions of human memory than a purely logical retelling. 
Randolph Pope likens the style to “a seamless web of truth and fiction [where] numbers confer a saving grace, an orientation in nowhere, an assurance that even if we do not know towards where, at least we are sure we are moving forward” (185). Pope’s analysis speaks to the somewhat chaotic experience of the reader and how it mirrors a Black Swan reality, where we latch to numbers and statistics only to find they are largely empty abstractions, that their “saving grace” does not point us to any higher truths. In this way, the narrator succeeds, not just at reporting, but also at recreating the experience of a failed quantitative mindset.
The narrator isn’t the only one who channels pain through the written word: after being jilted by Bayardo, Angela falls in love with him and eventually starts writing him “a weekly letter for over half a lifetime” (95), all the while developing a growing disgust for her mother. Angela doesn’t find sanity or necessarily make sense of the life around her with her writing; instead, she “discovered that hate and love are reciprocal passions” (93), through which she can gain insight into the workings of her own insanity. Through these letters she becomes “mistress of her fate for the first time” (93), discovering her voice and her sense of self by refuting logic––until one day, many years later, Bayardo actually does return.
Then, finally, there is the “investigating magistrate” who wrote the original death report of Santiago Nasar; he was, according to our narrator, a man quite evidently “burning with the fever of literature” who “kept falling into lyrical distractions that ran contrary to the rigour of his profession.” These “distractions” manifest themselves in marginal notes, which “not just because of the color of their ink, appeared to be written in blood” (99). In these poignant aphorisms, we see how the magistrate’s frustration with the case bleeds onto the page. He reverts to a literary impulse in order to capture this pain, but he simultaneously “never thought it legitimate that life should make use of so many coincidences forbidden literature” (99). His opinion reflects the process by which reality shapes the acceptable possibilities of literature; Nasar’s murder, which may have once seemed like a cheaply devised plot, is now a violent reality that he is tasked to record. In this way, the unforeseen captures the imagination. Chaos becomes literature. The Black Swan swims in red ink. 
In all its forms, the numbers game of Chronicle adds up to a story of bitter loss and pain, where the pen is the only true saving grace for the characters. The selfish Bayardo, the ironic autopsy, and the town’s interdependent guilt all result from ineffective pursuits of quantification, which mirror the social scientific methods that Taleb’s Black Swan Theory so vehemently denounces. Using this theory as a lens, we see how characters find power in focusing on antiknowledge. Whether through investigative flourish or plain madness, the writers find comfort in the ink. In this way, our application of Black Swan Theory comes full circle––the idea is not only a useful tool for examination, but fundamental to the art of writing itself. If Taleb is correct, and Black Swans truly make history, then literature appears to reflect the pursuit to capture the unforeseen past in all its complexity rather than solve it.
