April 8, 1928
The day dawned bleak and chill, a moving wall of gray light out of the
northeast which, instead of dissolving into moisture, seemed to
disintegrate into minute and venomous particles, like dust that, when
Dilsey opened the door of the cabin and emerged, needled laterally into her
flesh, precipitating not so much a moisture as a substance partaking of the
quality of thin, not quite congealed oil. She wore a stiff black straw hat
perched upon her turban, and a maroon velvet cape with a border of
mangy and anonymous fur above a dress of purple silk, and she stood in
the door for a while with her myriad and sunken face lifted to the weather,
and one gaunt hand flac-soled as the belly of a fish, then she moved the
cape aside and examined the bosom of her gown.
 The gown fell gauntly from her shoulders, across her fallen breasts, then
tightened upon her paunch and fell again, ballooning a little above the
nether garments which she would remove layer by layer as the spring
accomplished and the warm days, in color regal and moribund. She had
been a big woman once but now her skeleton rose, draped loosely in
unpadded skin that tightened again upon a paunch almost dropsical, as
though muscle and tissue had been courage or fortitude which the days or
the years had consumed until only the indomitable skeleton was left rising
like a ruin or a landmark above the somnolent and impervious guts, and
above that the collapsed face that gave the impression of the bones
themselves being outside the flesh, lifted into the driving day with an
expression at once fatalistic and of a child's astonished disappointment,
until she turned and entered the house again and closed the door.
 The earth immediately about the door was bare. It had a patina, as
though from the soles of bare feet in generations, like old silver or the walls
of Mexican houses which have been plastered by hand. Beside the house,
shading it in summer, stood three mulberry trees, the fledged leaves that
would later be broad and placid as the palms of hands streaming flatly
undulant upon the driving air. A pair of jaybirds came up from nowhere,
whirled up on the blast like gaudy scraps of cloth or paper and lodged in
the mulberries, where they swung in raucous tilt and recover, screaming
into the wind that ripped their harsh cries onward and away like scraps of
paper or of cloth in turn. Then three more joined them and they swung and
tilted in the wrung branches for a time, screaming. The door of the cabin
opened and Dilsey emerged once more, this time in a man's felt hat and an
army overcoat, beneath the frayed skirts of which her blue gingham dress
fell in uneven balloonings, streaming too about her as she crossed the yard
and mounted the steps to the kitchen door.
 A moment later she emerged, carrying an open umbrella now, which she
slanted ahead into the wind, and crossed to the woodpile and laid the
umbrella down, still open. Immediately she caught at it and arrested it and
held to it for a while, looking about her. Then she closed it and laid it down
and stacked stovewood into her crooked arm, against her breast, and
picked up the umbrella and got it open at last and returned to the steps and
held the wood precariously balanced while she contrived to close the
umbrella, which she propped in the corner just within the door. She
dumped the wood into the box behind the stove. Then she removed the
overcoat and hat and took a soiled apron down from the wall and put it on
and built a fire in the stove. While she was doing so, rattling the grate bars
and clattering the lids, Mrs Compson began to call her from the head of the
stairs.
 She wore a dressing gown of quilted black satin, holding it close under
her chin. In the other hand she held a red rubber hot water bottle and she
stood at the head of the back stairway, calling "Dilsey" at steady and
inflectionless intervals into the quiet stairwell that descended into
complete darkness, then opened again where a gray window fell across it.
"Dilsey," she called, without inflection or emphasis or haste, as though she
were not listening for a reply at all. "Dilsey."
 Dilsey answered and ceased clattering the stove, but before she could
cross the kitchen Mrs Compson called her again, and before she crossed
the diningroom and brought her head into relief against the gray splash of
the window, still again.
 "All right," Dilsey said. "All right, here I is. I'll fill hit soon ez I git some
hot water." She gathered up her skirts and mounted the stairs, wholly
blotting the gray light. "Put hit down dar en g'awn back to bed."
 "I couldn't understand what was the matter," Mrs Compson said. "I've
been lying awake for an hour at least, without hearing a sound from the
kitchen."
 "You put hit down and g'awn back to bed," Dilsey said. She toiled
painfully up the steps, shapeless, breathing heavily. "I'll have de fire gwine
in a minute, en de water hot in two mot"
 "I've been lying there for an hour, at least," Mrs Compson said. "I
thought maybe you were waiting for me to come down and start the fire."
 Dilsey reached the top of the stairs and took the water bottle. "I'll fix hit
in a minute," she said. "Luster overslep dis mawnin, up half de night at dat
show. I gwine build de fire myself. Go on now, so you wont wake de others
swell I ready."
 "If you permit Luster to do things that interfere with his work, you'll
have to suffer for it yourself," Mrs Compson said. "Jason wont like this if
he hears about it. You know he wont."
 "'Twusn't none of Jason's money he went on," Dilsey said. "Dat's one
thing shot" She went on down the stairs. Mrs Compson returned to her
room. As she got into bed again she could hear Dilsey yet descending the
stairs with a sort of painful and terrific slowness that would have become
maddening had it not presently ceased beyond the flapping diminishment
of the pantry door.
 She entered the kitchen and built up the fire and began to prepare
breakfast. In the midst of this she ceased and went to the window and
looked out toward her cabin, then she went to the door and opened it and
shouted into the driving weather.
 "Luster!" she shouted, standing to listen, tilting her face from the wind.
"You, Luster!" She listened, then as she prepared to shout again Luster
appeared around the corner of the kitchen.
 "Ma'am?" he said innocently, so innocently that Dilsey looked down at
him, for a moment motionless, with something more than mere surprise.
 "Whar you at?" she said.
 "Nowhere," he said. "Jes in de cellar."
 "Whut you coin in de cellar?" she said. "Dont stand dar in de rain, fool,"
she said.
 "Aint coin nothin," he said. He came up the steps.
 "Dont you dare come in dis do widout a armful of wood," she said. "Here
I done had to tote yo wood en build yo fire bofe. Didn't I tole you not to
leave dis place last night befo dat woodbox wus full to de top?"
 "I did," Luster said. "I filled hit."
 "Whar hit gone to, den?"
 "I dont know'm. I aint teched hit."
 "Well, you git hit full up now," she said. "And git on up dar en see bout
Benjy."
 She shut the door. Luster went to the woodpile. The five jaybirds
whirled over the house, screaming, and into the mulberries again. He
watched them. He picked up a rock and threw it. "Whoo," he said. "Git on
back to hell, whar you belong at. 'Taint Monday yit."
 He loaded himself mountainously with stove wood. He could not see
over it, and he staggered to the steps and up them and blundered crashing
against the door, shedding billets. Then Dilsey came and opened the door
for him and he blundered across the kitchen. "You, Luster!"Hah!"" she
shouted, but he had already hurled the wood into the box with a
thunderous crash. "Hah!" he said.
 "Is you tryin to wake up de whole house?" Dilsey said. She hit him on
the back of his head with the flat of her hand. "Go on up dar and git Benjy
dressed, now."
 "Yessum," he said. He went toward the outer door.
 "Whar you gwine Dilsey said.
 "I thought I better go round de house en in by de front, so I wont wake
up Miss Cahline en dem."
 "You go on up dem back stairs like I tole you en git Benjy's clothes on
him," Dilsey said. "Go on, now."
 "Yessum," Luster said. He returned and left by the diningroom door.
After a while it ceased to flap. Dilsey prepared to make biscuit. As she
ground the sifter steadily above the bread board, she sang, to herself at
first, something without particular tune or words, repetitive, mournful and
plaintive, austere, as she ground a faint, steady snowing of flour onto the
bread board. The stove had begun to heat the room and to fill it with
murmurous minors of the fire, and presently she was singing louder, as if
her voice too had been thawed out by the growing warmth, and then Mrs
Compson called her name again from within the house. Dilsey raised her
face as if her eyes could and did penetrate the walls and ceiling and saw the
old woman in her quilted dressing gown at the head of the stairs, calling
her name with machinelike regularity.
 "Oh, Lawd," Dilsey said. She set the sifter down and swept up the hem of
her apron and wiped her hands and caught up the bottle from the chair on
which she had laid it and gathered her apron about the handle of the kettle
which was now jetting faintly. "Jes a minute," she called. "De water jes dis
minute got hot."
 It was not the bottle which Mrs Compson wanted, however, and
clutching it by the neck like a dead hen Dilsey went to the foot of the stairs
and looked upward.
 "Aint Luster up dar wid him?" she said.
 "Luster hasn't been in the house. I've been lying here listening for him. I
knew he would be late, but I did hope he'd come in time to keep Benjamin
from disturbing Jason on Jason's one day in the week to sleep in the
morning."
 "I dont see how you expect anybody to sleep, wid you standin in de hall,
holl'in at folks fum de crack of dawn," Dilsey said. She began to mount the
stairs, toiling heavily. "I sent dat boy up dar half an hour ago."
 Mrs Compson watched her, holding the dressing gown under her chin.
"What are you going to do?" she said.
 "Gwine git Benjy dressed en bring him down to de kitchen, whar he
wont wake Jason en Quentin," Dilsey said.
 "Haven't you started breakfast yet?"
 "I'll tend to dat too," Dilsey said. "You better git back in bed swell Luster
make yo fire. Hit cold dis mawnin."
 "I know it," Mrs Compson said. "My feet are like ice. They were so cold
they waked me up." She watched Dilsey mount the stairs. It took her a long
while. "You know how it frets Jason when breakfast is late," Mrs Compson
said.
 "I cant do but one thing at a time," Dilsey said. "You git on back to bed,
fo I has you on my hands dis mawnin too."
 "If you're going to drop everything to dress Benjamin, I'd better come
down and get breakfast. You know as well as I do how Jason acts when it's
late."
 "En who gwine eat yo messin?" Dilsey said. "Tell me dat. Go on now,"
she said, toiling upward. Mrs Compson stood watching her as she
mounted, steadying herself against the wall with one hand, holding her
skirts up with the other.
 "Are you going to wake him up just to dress him?" she said.
 Dilsey stopped. With her foot lifted to the next step she stood there, her
hand against the wall and the gray splash of the window behind her,
motionless and shapeless she loomed.
 "He aint awake den?" she said.
 "He wasn't when I looked in," Mrs Compson said. "But it's past his time.
He never does sleep after half past seven. You know he doesn't."
 Dilsey said nothing. She made no further move, but though she could
not see her save as a blobby shape without depth, Mrs Compson knew that
she had lowered her face a little and that she stood now like cows do in the
rain, holding the empty water bottle by its neck.
 "You're not the one who has to bear it," Mrs Compson said. "It's not
your responsibility. You can go away. You dont have to bear the brunt of it
day in and day out. You owe nothing to them, to Mr Compson's memory. I
know you have never had any tenderness for Jason. You've never tried to
conceal it."
 Dilsey said nothing. She turned slowly and descended, lowering her
body from step to step, as a small child does, her hand against the wall.
"You go on and let him alone," she said. "Dont go in dar no mo, now. I'll
send Luster up soon as I find him. Let him alone, now."
 She returned to the kitchen. She looked into the stove, then she drew
her apron over her head and donned the overcoat and opened the outer
door and looked up and down the yard. The weather drove upon her flesh,
harsh and minute, but the scene was empty of all else that moved. She
descended the steps, gingerly, as if for silence, and went around the corner
of the kitchen. As she did so Luster emerged quickly and innocently from
the cellar door.
 Dilsey stopped. "Whut you up to?" she said.
 "Nothin," Luster said. "Mr Jason say fer me to find out whar dat water
leak in de cellar fum."
 "En when wus hit he say fer you to do dat?" Dilsey said. "Last New
Year's day, wasn't hit?"
 "I thought I jes be lookin whiles dey sleep," Luster said. Dilsey went to
the cellar door. He stood aside and she peered down into the obscurity
odorous of dank earth and mold and rubber.
 "Huh," Dilsey said. She looked at Luster again. He met her gaze blandly,
innocent and open. "I dont know whut you up to, but you aint got no
business coin hit. You jes tryin me too dis mawnin cause de others is, aint
you? You git on up dar en see to Benjy, you hear?"
 "Yessum," Luster said. He went on toward the kitchen steps, swiftly.
 "Here," Dilsey said. "You git me another armful of wood while I got
you."
 "Yessum," he said. He passed her on the steps and went to the woodpile.
When he blundered again at the door a moment later, again invisible and
blind within and beyond his wooden avatar, Dilsey opened the door and
guided him across the kitchen with a firm hand.
 "Jes thow hit at dat box again," she said. "Jes thow hit."
 "I got to," Luster said, panting. "I cant put hit down no other way."
 "Den you stand dar en hold hit a while," Dilsey said. She unloaded him a
stick at a time. "Whut got into you dis mawnin? Here I vent you fer wood
en you aint never brought mo'n six sticks at a time to save yo life swell
today. Whut you fixin to ax me kin you do now? Aint dat show lef town
yit?"
 "Yessum. Hit done gone."
 She put the last stick into the box. "Now you go on up dar wid Benjy, like
I tole you befo," she said. "And I dont want nobody else yellin down dem
stairs at me swell I rings de bell. You hear me."
 "Yessum," Luster said. He vanished through the swing door. Dilsey put
some more wood in the stove and returned to the bread board. Presently
she began to sing again.
 The room grew warmer. Soon Dilsey's skin had taken on a rich, lustrous
quality as compared with that as of a faint dusting of wood ashes which
both it and Luster's had worn as she moved about the kitchen, gathering
about her the raw materials of food, coordinating the meal. On the wall
above a cupboard, invisible save at night, by lamp light and even then
evincing an enigmatic profundity because it had but one hand, a cabinet
clock ticked, then with a preliminary sound as if it had cleared its throat,
struck five times.
 "Eight oclock," Dilsey said. She ceased and tilted her head upward,
listening. But there was no sound save the clock and the fire. She opened
the oven and looked at the pan of bread, then stooping she paused while
someone descended the stairs. She heard the feet cross the diningroom,
then the swing door opened and Luster entered, followed by a big man who
appeared to have been shaped of some substance whose particles would
not or did not cohere to one another or to the frame which supported it.
His skin was dead looking and hairless; dropsical too, he moved with a
shambling gait like a trained bear. His hair was pale and fine. It had been
brushed smoothly down upon his brow like that of children in
daguerrotypes. His eyes were clear, of the pale sweet blue of cornflowers,
his thick mouth hung open, drooling a little.
 "Is he cold?" Dilsey said. She wiped her hands on her apron and touched
his hand.
 "Ef he aint, I is," Luster said. "Always cold Easter. Aint never seen hit
fail. Miss Cahline say ef you aint got time to fix her hot water bottle to
never mind about hit." "Oh, Lawd," Dilsey said. She drew a chair into the
corner between the woodbox and the stove. The man went obediently and
sat in it. "Look in de dinin room and see whar I laid dat bottle down,"
Dilsey said. Luster fetched the bottle from the diningroom and Dilsey filled
it and gave it to him. "Hurry up, now," she said. "See ef Jason wake now.
Tell em hit's all ready."
 Luster went out. Ben sat beside the stove. He sat loosely, utterly
motionless save for his head, which made a continual bobbing sort of
movement as he watched Dilsey with his sweet vague gaze as she moved
about. Luster returned.
 "He up," he said. "Miss Cahline say put hit on de table." He came to the
stove and spread his hands palm down above the firebox. "He up, too," he
said. "Gwine hit wid bofe feet dis mawnin."
 "Whut's de matter now?" Dilsey said. "Git away fum dar. How kin I do
anything wid you standin over de stove?"
 "I cold," Luster said.
 "You ought to thought about dat whiles you was down dar in dat cellar,"
Dilsey said. "Whut de matter wid Jason?"
 "Sayin me en Benjy broke dat winder in his room."
 "Is dey one broke?" Dilsey said.
 "Dat's whut he sayin," Luster said. "Say I broke hit."
 "How could you, when he keep hit locked all day en night?"
 "Say I broke hit chunkin rocks at hit," Luster said.
 "En did you?"
 "Nome," Luster said.
 "Dont lie to me, boy," Dilsey said.
 "I never done hit," Luster said. "Ask Benjy ef I did. I aint stud'in dat
winder."
 "Who could a broke hit, den?" Dilsey said. "He jes tryin hisself, to wake
Quentin up," she said, taking the pan of biscuits out of the stove.
 "Reckin so," Luster said. "Dese funny folks. Glad I aint none of em."
 "Aint none of who?" Dilsey said. "Lemme tell you somethin, nigger boy,
you got jes es much Compson devilment in you es any of em. Is you right
sho you never broke dat window?"
 "Whut I want to break hit fur?"
 "Whut you do any of yo devilment fur?" Dilsey said. "Watch him now, so
he cant burn his hand again swell I git de table set."
 She went to the diningroom, where they heard her moving about, then
she returned and set a plate at the kitchen table and set food there. Ben
watched her, slobbering, making a faint, eager sound.
 "All right, honey," she said. "Here yo breakfast. Bring his chair, Luster."
Luster moved the chair up and Ben sat down, whimpering and slobbering.
Dilsey tied a cloth about his neck and wiped his mouth with the end of it.
"And see kin you keep fum messin up his clothes one time," she said,
handing Luster a spoon.
 Ben ceased whimpering. He watched the spoon as it rose to his mouth.
It was as if even eagerness were musclebound in him too, and hunger itself
inarticulate, not knowing it is hunger. Luster fed him with skill and
detachment. Now and then his attention would return long enough to
enable him to feint the spoon and cause Ben to close his mouth upon the
empty air, but it was apparent that Luster's mind was elsewhere. His other
hand lay on the back of the chair and upon that dead surface it moved
tentatively, delicately, as if he were picking an inaudible tune out of the
dead void, and once he even forgot to tease Ben with the spoon while his
fingers teased out of the slain wood a soundless and involved arpeggio until
Ben recalled him by whimpering again.
 In the diningroom Dilsey moved back and forth. Presently she rang a
small clear bell, then in the kitchen Luster heard Mrs Compson and Jason
descending, and Jason's voice, and he rolled his eyes whitely with
listening.
 "Sure, I know they didn't break it," Jason said. "Sure, I know that.
Maybe the change of weather broke it."
 "I dont see how it could have," Mrs Compson said. "Your room stays
locked all day long, just as you leave it when you go to town. None of us
ever go in there except Sunday, to clean it. I dont want you to think that I
would go where I'm not wanted, or that I would permit anyone else to."
 "I never said you broke it, did I?" Jason said.
 "I dont want to go in your room," Mrs Compson said. "I respect
anybody's private affairs. I wouldn't put my foot over the threshold, even if
I had a key."
 "Yes," Jason said. "I know your keys wont fit. That's why I had the lock
changed. What I want to know is, how that window got broken."
 "Luster say he didn't do hit," Dilsey said.
 "I knew that without asking him," Jason said. "Where's Quentin?" he
said.
 "Where she is ev'y Sunday mawnin," Dilsey said. "Whut got into you de
last few days, anyhow?"
 "Well, we're going to change all that," Jason said. "Go up and tell her
breakfast is ready."
 "You leave her alone now, Jason," Dilsey said. "She gits up fer breakfast
ev'y week mawnin, en Miss Cahline lets her stay in bed ev'y Sunday. You
knows dat."
 "I cant keep a kitchen full of niggers to wait on her pleasure, much as I'd
like to," Jason said. "Go and tell her to come down to breakfast."
 "Aint nobody have to wait on her," Dilsey said. "I puts her breakfast in
de warmer en she--"
 "Did you hear me?" Jason said.
 "I hears you," Dilsey said. "All I been hearin, when you in de house. Ef
hit aint Quentin er yo maw, hit's Luster en Benjy. Whut you let him go on
dat way fer, Miss Cahline?"
 "You'd better do as he says," Mrs Compson said. "He's head of the house
now. It's his right to require us to respect his wishes. I try to do it, and if I
can, you can too."
 "'Taint no sense in him bein so bad tempered he got to make Quentin git
up jes to suit him," Dilsey said. "Maybe you think she broke dat window."
 "She would, if she happened to think of it," Jason said. "You go and do
what I told you."
 "En I wouldn't blame her none ef she did," Dilsey said, going toward the
stairs. "Wid you naggin at her all de blessed time you in de house."
 "Hush, Dilsey," Mrs Compson said. "It's neither your place nor mine to
tell Jason what to do. Sometimes I think he is wrong, but I try to obey his
wishes for you all's sakes. If I'm strong enough to come to the table,
Quentin can too."
 Dilsey went out. They heard her mounting the stairs. They heard her a
long while on the stairs.
 "You've got a prize set of servants," Jason said. He helped his mother
and himself to food. "Did you ever have one that was worth killing? You
must have had some before I was big enough to remember."
 "I have to humor them," Mrs Compson said. "I have to depend on them
so completely. It's not as if I were strong. I wish I were. I wish I could do all
the house work myself. I could at least take that much off your shoulders."
 "And a fine pigsty we'd live in, too," Jason said. "Hurry up, Dilsey," he
shouted.
 "I know you blame me," Mrs Compson said, "for letting them off to go to
church today."
 "Go where?" Jason said. "Hasn't that damn show left yet?"
 "To church," Mrs Compson said. "The darkies are having a special
Easter service. I promised Dilsey two weeks ago that they could get off."
 "Which means we'll eat cold dinner," Jason said, "or none at all."
 "I know it's my fault," Mrs Compson said. "I know you blame me."
 "For what?" Jason said. "You never resurrected Christ, did you?"
 They heard Dilsey mount the final stair, then her slow feet overhead.
 "Quentin," she said. When she called the first time Jason laid his knife
and fork down and he and his mother appeared to wait across the table
from one another in identical attitudes; the one cold and shrewd, with
close-thatched brown hair curled into two stubborn hooks, one on either
side of his forehead like a bartender in caricature, and hazel eyes with
black-ringed irises like marbles, the other cold and querulous, with
perfectly white hair and eyes pouched and baffled and so dark as to appear
to be all pupil or all iris.
 "Quentin," Dilsey said. "Get up, honey. Dey waitin breakfast on you."
 "I cant understand how that window got broken," Mrs Compson said.
"Are you sure it was done yesterday? It could have been like that a long
time, with the warm weather. The upper sash, behind the shade like that."
 "I've told you for the last time that it happened yesterday," Jason said.
"Dont you reckon I know the room I live in? Do you reckon I could have
lived in it a week with a hole in the window you could stick your hand...."
his voice ceased, ebbed, left him staring at his mother with eyes that for an
instant were quite empty of anything. It was as though his eyes were
holding their breath, while his mother looked at him, her face flaccid and
querulous, interminable, clairvoyant yet obtuse. As they sat so Dilsey said,
 "Quentin. Dont play wid me, honey. Come on to breakfast, honey. Dey
waitin fer you."
 "I cant understand it," Mrs Compson said. "It's just as if somebody had
tried to break into the house--" Jason sprang up. His chair crashed over
backward. "What--" Mrs Compson said, staring at him as he ran past her
and went jumping up the stairs, where he met Dilsey. His face was now in
shadow, and Dilsey said,
 "She sullin. Yo maw aint unlocked--" But Jason ran on past her and
along the corridor to a door. He didn't call. He grasped the knob and tried
it, then he stood with the knob in his hand and his head bent a little, as if
he were listening to something much further away than the dimensioned
room beyond the door, and which he already heard. His attitude was that
of one who goes through the motions of listening in order to deceive
himself as to what he already hears. Behind him Mrs Compson mounted
the stairs, calling his name. Then she saw Dilsey and she quit calling him
and began to call Dilsey instead.
 "I told you she aint unlocked dat do yit," Dilsey said.
 When she spoke he turned and ran toward her, but his voice was quiet,
matter of fact. "She carry the key with her?" he said. "Has she got it now, I
mean, or will she have--"
 "Dilsey," Mrs Compson said on the stairs.
 "Is which?" Dilsey said. "Whyn't you let--"
 "The key," Jason said. "To that room. Does she carry it with her all the
time. Mother." Then he saw Mrs Compson and he went down the stairs and
met her. "Give me the key," he said. He fell to pawing at the pockets of the
rusty black dressing sacque she wore. She resisted.
 "Jason," she said. "Jason! Are you and Dilsey trying to put me to bed
again?" she said, trying to fend him off. "Cant you even let me have Sunday
in peace?"
 "The key," Jason said, pawing at her. "Give it here." He looked back at
the door, as if he expected it to fly open before he could get back to it with
the key he did not yet have.
 "You, Dilsey!" Mrs Compson said, clutching her sacque about her.
 "Give me the key, you old fool!" Jason cried suddenly. From her pocket
he tugged a huge bunch of rusted keys on an iron ring like a mediaeval
jailer's and ran back up the hall with the two women behind him.
 "You, Jason!" Mrs Compson said. "He will never find the right one," she
said. "You know I never let anyone take my keys, Dilsey," she said. She
began to wail.
 "Hush," Dilsey said. "He aint gwine do nothin to her. I aint gwine let
him."
 "But on Sunday morning, in my own house," Mrs Compson said. "When
I've tried so hard to raise them christians. Let me find the right key, Jason,"
she said. She put her hand on his arm. Then she began to struggle with
him, but he flung her aside with a motion of his elbow and looked around
at her for a moment, his eyes cold and harried, then he turned to the door
again and the unwieldy keys.
 "Hush," Dilsey said. "You, Jason!"
 "Something terrible has happened," Mrs Compson said, wailing again. "I
know it has. You, Jason," she said, grasping at him again. "He wont even
let me find the key to a room in my own house!"
 "Now, now," Dilsey said. "Whut kin happen? I right here. I aint gwine let
him hurt her. Quentin," she said, raising her voice, "dont you be skeered,
honey, I'se right here."
 The door opened, swung inward. He stood in it for a moment, hiding the
room, then he stepped aside. "Go in," he said in a thick, light voice. They
went in. It was not a girl's room. It was not anybody's room, and the faint
scent of cheap cosmetics and the few feminine objects and the other
evidences of crude and hopeless efforts to feminise it but added to its
anonymity, giving it that dead and stereotyped transience of rooms in
assignation houses. The bed had not been disturbed. On the floor lay a
soiled undergarment of cheap silk a little too pink, from a half open bureau
drawer dangled a single stocking. The window was open. A pear tree grew
there, close against the house. It was in bloom and the branches scraped
and rasped against the house and the myriad air, driving in the window,
brought into the room the forlorn scent of the blossoms.
 "Dar now," Dilsey said. "Didn't I told you she all right?"
 "All right?" Mrs Compson said. Dilsey followed her into the room and
touched her.
 "You come on and lay down, now," she said. "I find her in ten minutes."
 Mrs Compson shook her off. "Find the note," she said. "Quentin left a
note when he did it."
 "All right," Dilsey said. "I'll find hit. You come on to yo room, now."
 "I knew the minute they named her Quentin this would happen," Mrs
Compson said. She went to the bureau and began to turn over the scattered
objects there--scent bottles, a box of powder, a chewed pencil, a pair of
scissors with one broken blade lying upon a darned scarf dusted with
powder and stained with rouge. "Find the note," she said.
 "I is," Dilsey said. "You come on, now. Me and Jason'll find hit. You
come on to yo room."
 "Jason," Mrs Compson said. "Where is he?" She went to the door. Dilsey
followed her on down the hall, to another door. It was closed. "Jason," she
called through the door. There was no answer. She tried the knob, then she
called him again. But there was still no answer, for he was hurling things
backward out of the closet, garments, shoes, a suitcase. Then he emerged
carrying a sawn section of tongue-and-groove planking and laid it down
and entered the closet again and emerged with a metal box. He set it on the
bed and stood looking at the broken lock while he dug a keyring from his
pocket and selected a key, and for a time longer he stood with the selected
key in his hand, looking at the broken lock. Then he put the keys back in
his pocket and carefully tilted the contents of the box out upon the bed.
Still carefully he sorted the papers, taking them up one at a time and
shaking them. Then he upended the box and shook it too and slowly
replaced the papers and stood again, looking at the broken lock, with the
box in his hands and his head bent. Outside the window he heard some
jaybirds swirl shrieking past and away, their cries whipping away along the
wind, and an automobile passed somewhere and died away also. His
mother spoke his name again beyond the door, but he didn't move. He
heard Dilsey lead her away up the hall, and then a door closed. Then he
replaced the box in the closet and flung the garments back into it and went
down stairs to the telephone. While he stood there with the receiver to his
ear waiting Dilsey came down the stairs. She looked at him, without
stopping, and went on.
 The wire opened. "This is Jason Compson," he said, his voice so harsh
and thick that he had to repeat himself. "Jason Compson," he said,
controlling his voice. "Have a car ready, with a deputy, if you cant go, in ten
minutes. I'll be there-- What?-- Robbery. My house. I know who it
Robbery, I say. Have a car read-- What?? Aren't you a paid law
enforcement-- Yes, I'll be there in five minutes. Have that car ready to
leave at once. If you dont, I'll report it to the governor."
 He clapped the receiver back and crossed the diningroom, where the
scarce broken meal lay cold now on the table, and entered the kitchen.
Dilsey was filling the hot water bottle. Ben sat, tranquil and empty. Beside
him Luster looked like a fice dog, brightly watchful. He was eating
something. Jason went on across the kitchen.
 "Aint you going to eat no breakfast?" Dilsey said. He paid her no
attention. "Go on en eat yo breakfast, Jason." He went on. The outer door
banged behind him. Luster rose and went to the window and looked out.
 "Whoo," he said. "Whut happenin up dar? He been beatin Miss
Quentin?"
 "You hush yo mouf," Dilsey said. "You git Benjy started now en I beat yo
head off. You keep him quiet es you kin swell I git back, now." She screwed
the cap on the bottle and went out. They heard her go up the stairs, then
they heard Jason pass the house in his car. Then there was no sound in the
kitchen save the simmering murmur of the kettle and the clock.
 "You know whut I bet?" Luster said. "I bet he beat her. I bet he knock
her in de head en now he gone fer de doctor. Dat's whut I bet." The clock
tick-tocked, solemn and profound. It might have been the dry pulse of the
decaying house itself, after a while it whirred and cleared its throat and
struck six times. Ben looked up at it, then he looked at the bulletlike
silhouette of Luster's head in the window and he begun to bob his head
again, drooling. He whimpered.
 "Hush up, looney," Luster said without turning. "Look like we aint
"gwine git to go to no church today." But Ben sat in the chair, his big soft
hands dangling between his knees, moaning faintly. Suddenly he wept, a
slow bellowing sound, meaningless and sustained. "Hush," Luster said. He
turned and lifted his hand. "You want me to whup you?" But Ben looked at
him, bellowing slowly with each expiration. Luster came and shook him.
"You hush dis minute!" he shouted. "Here," he said. He hauled Ben out of
the chair and dragged the chair around facing the stove and opened the
door to the firebox and shoved Ben into the chair. They looked like a tug
nudging at a clumsy tanker in a narrow dock. Ben sat down again facing
the rosy door. He hushed. Then they heard the clock again, and Dilsey slow
on the stairs. When she entered he began to whimper again. Then he lifted
his voice.
 "Whut you done to him?" Dilsey said. "Why cant you let him lone dis
mawnin, of all times?"
 "I aint doin nothin to him," Luster said. "Mr Jason skeered him, dat's
whut hit is. He aint kilt Miss Quentin, is he?"
 "Hush, Benjy," Dilsey said. He hushed. She went to the window and
looked out. "Is it quit rainin?" she said.
 "Yessum," Luster said. "Quit long time ago."
 "Den y'all go out do's a while," she said. "I jes got Miss Cahline quiet
now."
 "Is we gwine to church?" Luster said.
 "I let you know bout dat when de time come. You keep him away fum de
house swell I calls you."
 "Kin we go to de pastuh?" Luster said.
 "All right. Only you keep him away fum de house. I done stood all I
kin."
 "Yessum," Luster said. "Whar Mr Jason gone, mammy?"
 "Dat's some mo of yo business, aint it?" Dilsey said. She began to clear
the table. "Hush, Benjy. Luster gwine take you out to play."
 "Whut he done to Miss Quentin, mammy?" Luster said.
 "Aint done nothin to her. You all git on outen here."
 "I bet she aint here," Luster said.
 Dilsey looked at him. "How you know she aint here?"
 "Me and Benjy seed her clamb out de window last night. Didn't us,
Benjy?"
 "You did?" Dilsey said, looking at him.
 "We sees her doin hit ev'y night," Luster said. "Clamb right down dat
pear tree."
 "Dont you lie to me, nigger boy," Dilsey said.
 "I aint lyin. Ask Benjy ef I is."
 "Whyn't you say somethin about it, den?"
 "'Twarn't none o my business," Luster said. "I aint gwine git mixed up in
white folks' business. Come on here, Benjy, les go out do's."
 They went out. Dilsey stood for a while at the table, then she went and
cleared the breakfast things from the diningroom and ate her breakfast and
cleaned up the kitchen. Then she removed her apron and hung it up and
went to the foot of the stairs and listened for a moment. There was no
sound. She donned the overcoat and the hat and went across to her cabin.
 The rain had stopped. The air now drove out of the southeast, broken
overhead into blue patches. Upon the crest of a hill beyond the trees and
roofs and spires of town sunlight lay like a pale scrap of cloth, was blotted
away. Upon the air a bell came, then as if at a signal, other bells took up the
sound and repeated it.
 The cabin door opened and Dilsey emerged, again in the maroon cape
and the purple gown, and wearing soiled white elbow-length gloves and
minus her headcloth now. She came into the yard and called Luster. She
waited a while, then she went to the house and around it to the cellar door,
moving close to the wall, and looked into the door. Ben sat on the steps.
Before him Luster squatted on the damp floor. He held a saw in his left
hand, the blade sprung a little by pressure of his hand, and he was in the
act of striking the blade with the worn wooden mallet with which she had
been making beaten biscuit for more than thirty years. The saw gave forth
a single sluggish twang that ceased with lifeless alacrity, leaving the blade
in a thin clean curve between Luster's hand and the floor. Still, inscrutable,
it bellied.
 "Dat's de way he done hit," Luster said. "I jes aint foun de right thing to
hit it wid."
 "Dat's whut you doin, is it?" Dilsey said. "Bring me dat mallet," she
said.
 "I aint hurt hit," Luster said.
 "Bring hit here," Dilsey said. "Put dat saw whar you got hit first."
 He put the saw away and brought the mallet to her. Then Ben wailed
again, hopeless and prolonged. It was nothing. Just sound. It might have
been all time and injustice and sorrow become vocal for an instant by a
conjunction of planets.
 "Listen at him," Luster said. "He been gwine on dat way ev'y since you
vent us outen de house. I dont know whut got in to him dis mawnin."
 "Bring him here," Dilsey said.
 "Come on, Benjy," Luster said. He went back down the steps and took
Ben's arm. He came obediently, wailing, that slow hoarse sound that ships
make, that seems to begin before the sound itself has started, seems to
cease before the sound itself has stopped.
 "Run and git his cap," Dilsey said. "Dont make no noise Miss Cahline kin
hear. Hurry, now. We already late."
 "She gwine hear him anyhow, ef you dont stop him," Luster said.
 "He stop when we git off de place," Dilsey said. "He smellin hit. Dat's
whut hit is."
 "Smell whut, mammy?" Luster said.
 "You go git dat cap," Dilsey said. Luster went on. They stood in the cellar
door, Ben one step below her. The sky was broken now into scudding
patches that dragged their swift shadows up out of the shabby garden, over
the broken fence and across the yard. Dilsey stroked Ben's head, slowly and
steadily, smoothing the bang upon his brow. He wailed quietly,
unhurriedly. "Hush," Dilsey said. "Hush, now. We be gone in a minute.
Hush, now." He wailed quietly and steadily.
 Luster returned, wearing a stiff new straw hat with a colored band and
carrying a cloth cap. The hat seemed to isolate Luster's skull, in the
beholder's eye as a spotlight would, in all its individual planes and angles.
So peculiarly individual was its shape that at first glance the hat appeared
to be on the head of someone standing immediately behind Luster. Dilsey
looked at the hat.
 "Whyn't you wear yo old hat?" she said.
 "Couldn't find hit," Luster said.
 "I bet you couldn't. I bet you fixed hit last night so you couldn't find hit.
You fixin to ruin dat un."
 "Aw, mammy," Luster said. "Hit aint gwine rain."
 "How you know? You go git dat old hat en put dat new un away."
 "Aw, mammy."
 "Den you go git de umbreller."
 "Aw, mammy."
 "Take yo choice," Dilsey said. "Git yo old hat, er de umbreller. I dont
keer which."
 Luster went to the cabin. Ben wailed quietly.
 "Come on," Dilsey said. "Dey kin ketch up wid us. We "wine to hear de
singin." They went around the house, toward the gate. "Hush," Dilsey said
from time to time as they went down the drive. They reached the gate.
Dilsey opened it. Luster was coming down the drive behind them, carrying
the umbrella. A woman was with him. "Here dey come," Dilsey said. They
passed out the gate. "Now, den," she said. Ben ceased. Luster and his
mother overtook them. Frony wore a dress of bright blue silk and a
flowered hat. She was a thin woman, with a flat, pleasant face.
 "You got six weeks' work right dar on yo back," Dilsey said. "Whut you
gwine do ef hit rain?"
 "Git wet, I reckon," Frony said. "I aint never stopped no rain yit."
 "Mammy always talkin bout hit gwine rain," Luster said.
 "Ef I dont worry bout y'all, I dont know who is," Dilsey said. "Come on,
we already late."
 "Rev'un Shegog gwine preach today," Frony said.
 "Is?" Dilsey said. "Who him?"
 "He fum Saint Looey," Frony said. "Dat big preacher."
 "Huh," Dilsey said. "Whut dey needs is a man kin put de fear of God into
dese here triflin young niggers."
 "Rev'un Shegog kin do dat," Frony said. "So dey tells."
 They went on along the street. Along its quiet length white people in
bright clumps moved churchward, under the windy bells, walking now and
then in the random and tentative sun. The wind was gusty, out of the
southeast, chill and raw after the warm days.
 "I wish you wouldn't keep on bringin him to church, mammy," Frony
said. "Folks talkin."
 "Whut folks?" Dilsey said.
 "I hears em," Frony said.
 "And I knows whut kind of folks," Dilsey said. "Trash white folks. Dat's
who it is. Thinks he aint good enough fer white church, but nigger church
aint good enough fer him."
 "Dey talks, jes de same," Frony said.
 "Den you send um to me," Dilsey said. "Tell um de good Lawd dont keer
whether he bright er not. Dont nobody but white trash keer dat."
 A street turned off at right angles, descending, and became a dirt road.
On either hand the land dropped more sharply; a broad flat dotted with
small cabins whose weathered roofs were on a level with the crown of the
road. They were set in small grassless plots littered with broken things,
bricks, planks, crockery, things of a once utilitarian value. What growth
there was consisted of rank weeds and the trees were mulberries and
locusts and sycamores--trees that partook also of the foul desiccation
which surrounded the houses; trees whose very burgeoning seemed to be
the sad and stubborn remnant of September, as if even spring had passed
them by, leaving them to feed upon the rich and unmistakable smell of
negroes in which they grew.
 From the doors negroes spoke to them as they passed, to Dilsey
usually:
 "Sis' Gibson! How you dis mawnin?" "I'm well. Is you well?"
 "I'm right well, I thank you."
 They emerged from the cabins and struggled up the sharing levee to the
road--men in staid, hard brown or black, with gold watch chains and now
and then a stick; young men in cheap violent blues or stripes and
swaggering hats; women a little stiffly sibilant, and children in garments
bought second hand of white people, who looked at Ben with the
covertness of nocturnal animals:
 "I bet you wont go up en tech him."
 "How come I wont?"
 "I bet you wont. I bet you skeered to." "He wont hurt folks. He des a
looney." "How come a looney wont hurt folks?" "sat un wont. I teched
him."
 "I bet you wont now."
 "Case Miss Dilsey lookin." "You wont no ways."
 "He dont hurt folks. He des a looney."
 And steadily the older people speaking to Dilsey, though, unless they
were quite old, Dilsey permitted Frony to respond.
 "Mammy aint feelin well dis mawnin."
 "Dat's too bad. But Rev'un Shegog'll kyo dat. He'll give her de comfort en
de unburdenin."
 The road rose again, to a scene like a painted backdrop. Notched into a
cut of red clay crowned with oaks the road appeared to stop short off, like a
cut ribbon. Beside it a weathered church lifted its crazy steeple like a
painted church, and the whole scene was as flat and without perspective as
a painted cardboard set upon the ultimate edge of the flat earth, against the
windy sunlight of space and April and a midmorning filled with bells.
Toward the church they thronged with slow sabbath deliberation, the
women and children went on in, the men stopped outside and talked in
quiet groups until the bell ceased ringing. Then they too entered.
 The church had been decorated, with sparse flowers from kitchen
gardens and hedgerows, and with streamers of colored crepe paper. Above
the pulpit hung a battered Christmas bell, the accordion sort that collapses.
The pulpit was empty, though the choir was already in place, fanning
themselves although it was not warm.
 Most of the women were gathered on one side of the room. They were
talking. Then the bell struck one time and they dispersed to their seats and
the congregation sat for an instant, expectant. The bell struck again one
time. The choir rose and began to sing and the congregation turned its
head as one as six small children--four girls with tight pigtails bound with
small scraps of cloth like butterflies, and two boys with close napped
heads--entered and marched up the aisle, strung together in a harness of
white ribbons and flowers, and followed by two men in single file. The
second man was huge, of a light coffee color, imposing in a frock coat and
white tie. His head was magisterial and profound, his neck rolled above his
collar in rich folds. But he was familiar to them, and so the heads were still
reverted when he had passed, and it was not until the choir ceased singing
that they realised that the visiting clergyman had already entered, and
when they saw the man who had preceded their minister enter the pulpit
still ahead of him an indescribable sound went up, a sigh, a sound of
astonishment and disappointment.
 The visitor was undersized, in a shabby alpaca coat. He had a wizened
black face like a small, aged monkey. And all the while that the choir sang
again and while the six children rose and sang in thin, frightened, tuneless
whispers, they watched the insignificant looking man sitting dwarfed and
countrified by the minister's imposing bulk, with something like
consternation. They were still looking at him with consternation and
unbelief when the minister rose and introduced him in rich, rolling tones
whose very unction served to increase the visitor's insignificance.
 "En dey brung dat all de way fum Saint Looey," Frony whispered.
 "I've knowed de Lawd to use cuiser tools den dat," Dilsey said. "Hush,
now," she said to Ben. "Dey fixin to sing again in a minute."
 When the visitor rose to speak he sounded like a white man. His voice
was level and cold. It sounded too big to have come from him and they
listened at first through curiosity, as they would have to a monkey talking.
They began to watch him as they would a man on a tight rope. They even
forgot his insignificant appearance in the virtuosity with which he ran and
poised and swooped upon the cold inflectionless wire of his voice, so that at
last, when with a sort of swooping glide he came to rest again beside the
reading desk with one arm resting upon it at shoulder height and his
monkey body as reft of all motion as a mummy or an emptied vessel, the
congregation sighed as if it waked from a collective dream and moved a
little in its seats. Behind the pulpit the choir fanned steadily. Dilsey
whispered, "Hush, now. Dey fixin to sing in a minute."
 Then a voice said, "Brethren."
 The preacher had not moved. His arm lay yet across the desk, and he
still held that pose while the voice died in sonorous echoes between the
walls. It was as different as day and dark from his former tone, with a sad,
timbrous quality like an alto horn, sinking into their hearts and speaking
there again when it had ceased in fading and cumulate echoes.
 "Brethren and sisteren," it said again. The preacher removed his arm
and he began to walk back and forth before the desk, his hands clasped
behind him, a meagre figure, hunched over upon itself like that of one long
immured in striving with the implacable earth, "I got the recollection and
the blood of the Lamb!" He tramped steadily back and forth beneath the
twisted paper and the Christmas bell, hunched, his hands clasped behind
him. He was like a worn small rock whelmed by the successive waves of his
voice. With his body he seemed to feed the voice that, succubus like, had
fleshed its teeth in him. And the congregation seemed to watch with its
own eyes while the voice consumed him, until he was nothing and they
were nothing and there was not even a voice but instead their hearts were
speaking to one another in chanting measures beyond the need for words,
so that when he came to rest against the reading desk, his monkey face
lifted and his whole attitude that of a serene, tortured crucifix that
transcended its shabbiness and insignificance and made it of no moment, a
long moaning expulsion of breath rose from them, and a woman's single
soprano: "Yes, Jesus!"
 As the scudding day passed overhead the dingy windows glowed and
faded in ghostly retrograde. A car passed along the road outside, laboring
in the sand, died away. Dilsey sat bolt upright, her hand on Ben's knee.
Two tears slid down her fallen cheeks, in and out of the myriad
coruscations of immolation and abnegation and time.
 "Brethren," the minister said in a harsh whisper, without moving.
 "Yes, Jesus!" the woman's voice said, hushed yet.
 "Breddren en sistuhn!" His voice rang again, with the horns. He
removed his arm and stood erect and raised his hands. "I got de
ricklickshun en de blood of de Lamb!" They did not mark just when his
intonation, his pronunciation, became negroid, they just sat swaying a little
in their seats as the voice took them into itself.
 "When de long, cold--Oh, I tells you, breddren, when de long, cold.... I
sees de light en I sees de word, po sinner! Dey passed away in Egypt, de
swingin chariots; de generations passed away. Wus a rich man: whar he
now, O breddren? Wus a po man: whar he now, O sistuhn? Oh I tells you,
ef you aint got de milk en de dew of de old salvation when de long, cold
years rolls away!"
 "Yes, Jesus!"
 "I tells you, breddren, en I tells you, sistuhn, dey'll come a time. Po
sinner sayin Let me lay down wid de Lawd, femme lay down my load. Den
whut Jesus "wine say, O breddren? O sistuhn? Is you got de ricklickshun
en de Blood of de Lamb? Case I aint gwine load down heaven!"
 He fumbled in his coat and took out a handkerchief and mopped his
face. A low concerted sound rose from the congregation:
"Mmmmmmmmmmmmm!" The woman's voice said, "Yes, Jesus! Jesus!"
 "Breddren! Look at dem little chiller settin dar. Jesus wus like dat once.
He mammy suffered de glory en de pangs. Sometime maybe she heft him
at de nightfall, whilst de angels singin him to sleep; maybe she look out de
do en see de Roman po-lice passin." He tramped back and forth, mopping
his face. "Listen, breddren! I sees de day. Ma'y settin in de do wid Jesus on
her lap, de little Jesus. Like dem chiller dar, de little Jesus. I hears de
angels singin de peaceful songs en de glory; I sees de closin eyes; sees Mary
jump up, sees de sojer face: We gwine to kill! We gwine to kill! We gwine to
kill yo little Jesus! I hears de weepin en de lamentation of de po mammy
widout de salvation en de word of God!"
 "Mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm! Jesus! Little Jesus! and another voice,
rising:
 "I sees, O Jesus! Oh I sees!" and still another, without words, like
bubbles rising in water.
 "I sees hit, breddren! I sees hit! Sees de blastin, blindin sight! I sees
Calvary, wid de sacred trees, sees de thief en de murderer en de least of
dese; I hears de boastin en de braggin: Ef you be Jesus, lif up yo tree en
walk! I hears de wailin of women en de evenin lamentations; I hears de
weepin en de cryin en de turns-away face of God: dey done kilt Jesus; dey
done kilt my Son!"
 "Mmmmmmmmmmmmm. Jesus! I sees, O Jesus!"
 "O blind sinner! Breddren, I tells you; sistuhn, I says to you, when de
Lawd did turn His mighty face, say, Aint "wine overload heaven! I can see
de widowed God shet His do; I sees de whelmin flood roll between; I sees
de darkness en de death everlastin upon de generations. Den, lo! Breddren!
Yes, breddren! Whut I see? Whut I see, O sinner? I sees de resurrection en
de light; sees de meek Jesus sayin Dey kilt me dat ye shall live again; I died
dat dem whut sees en believes shall never die. Breddren, O breddren! I sees
de doom crack en de golden horns shoutin down de glory, en de arisen
dead whut got de blood en de ricklickshun of de Lamb!"
 In the midst of the voices and the hands Ben sat, rapt in his sweet blue
gaze. Dilsey sat bolt upright beside, crying rigidly and quietly in the
annealment and the blood of the remembered Lamb.
 As they walked through the bright noon, up the sandy road with the
dispersing congregation talking easily again group to group, she continued
to weep, unmindful of the talk.
 "He sho a preacher, mon!! He didn't look like much at first, but hush!"
 "He seed de power en de glory."
 "Yes, suh. He seed hit. Face to face he seed hit."
 Dilsey made no sound, her face did not quiver as the tears took their
sunken and devious courses, walking with her head up, making no effort to
dry them away even.
 "Whyn't you quit dat, mammy?" Frony said. "Wid all dese people lookin.
We be passin white folks soon."
 "I've seed de first en de last," Dilsey said. "Never you mind me."
 "First en last whut?" Frony said.
 "Never you mind," Dilsey said. "I seed de beginnin, en now I sees de
endin."
 Before they reached the street though she stopped and lifted her skirt
and dried her eyes on the hem of her topmost underskirt. Then they went
on. Ben shambled along beside Dilsey, watching Luster who anticked along
ahead, the umbrella in his hand and his new straw hat slanted viciously in
the sunlight, like a big foolish dog watching a small clever one. They
reached the gate and entered. Immediately Ben began to whimper again,
and for a while all of them looked up the drive at the square, paintless
house with its rotting portico.
 "Whut's gwine on up dar today?" Frony said. "Somethin is."
 "Nothin," Dilsey said. "You tend to yo business en let de whitefolks tend
to deir'n."
 "Somethin is," Frony said. "I heard him first thing dis mawnin. 'Taint
none of my business, dough."
 "En I knows whut, too," Luster said.
 "You knows mo den you got any use fer," Dilsey said. "Aint you jes heard
Frony say hit aint none of yo business? You take Benjy on to de back and
keep him quiet swell I put dinner on."
 "I knows whar Miss Quentin is," Luster said.
 "Den jes keep hit," Dilsey said. "Soon es Quentin need any of yo egvice,
I'll let you know. Y'all g'awn en play in de back, now."
 "You know whut gwine happen soon es dey start playin dat ball over
yonder," Luster said.
 "Dey wont start fer a while yit. By dat time T. P. be here to take him
ridin. Here, you gimme dat new hat."
 Luster gave her the hat and he and Ben went on across the back yard.
Ben was still whimpering, though not loud. Dilsey and Frony went to the
cabin. After a while Dilsey emerged, again in the faded calico dress, and
went to the kitchen. The fire had died down. There was no sound in the
house. She put on the apron and went up stairs. There was no sound
anywhere. Quentin's room was as they had left it. She entered and picked
up the undergarment and put the stocking back in the drawer and closed it.
Mrs Compson's door was closed. Dilsey stood beside it for a moment,
listening. Then she opened it and entered, entered a pervading reek of
camphor. The shades were drawn, the room in halflight, and the bed, so
that at first she thought Mrs Compson was asleep and was about to close
the door when the other spoke.
 "Well?" she said. "What is it?"
 "Hit's me," Dilsey said. "You want anything?"
 Mrs Compson didn't answer. After a while, without moving her head at
all, she said: "Where's Jason?"
 "He aint come back yit," Dilsey said. "Whut you want?"
 Mrs Compson said nothing. Like so many cold, weak people, when faced
at last by the incontrovertible disaster she exhumed from somewhere a sort
of fortitude, strength. In her case it was an unshakable conviction
regarding the yet unplumbed event. "Well," she said presently. "Did you
find it?"
 "Find whut? Whut you talkin about?"
 "The note. At least she would have enough consideration to leave a note.
Even Quentin did that."
 "Whut you talkin about?" Dilsey said. "Dont you know she all right? I
bet she be walkin right in dis do befo dark."
 "Fiddlesticks," Mrs Compson said. "It's in the blood. Like uncle, like
niece. Or mother. I dont know which would be worse. I dont seem to
care."
 "Whut you keep on talkin that way fur?" Dilsey said. "Whut she want to
do anything like that fur?"
 "I dont know. What reason did Quentin have? Under God's heaven what
reason did he have? It cant be simply to flout and hurt me. Whoever God
is, He would not permit that. I'm a lady. You might not believe that from
my offspring, but I am."
 "You des wait en see," Dilsey said. "She be here by night, right dar in her
bed." Mrs Compson said nothing. The camphor soaked cloth lay upon her
brow. The black robe lay across the foot of the bed. Dilsey stood with her
hand on the door knob.
 "Well," Mrs Compson said. "What do you want? Are you going to fix
some dinner for Jason and Benjamin, or not?"
 "Jason aint come yit," Dilsey said. "I gwine fix somethin. You sho you
dont want nothin? Yo bottle still hot enough?"
 "You might hand me my bible."
 "I give hit to you dis mawnin, befo I left."
 "You laid it on the edge of the bed. How long did you expect it to stay
there?"
 Dilsey crossed to the bed and groped among the shadows beneath the
edge of it and found the bible, face down. She smoothed the bent pages and
laid the book on the bed again. Mrs Compson didn't open her eyes. Her
hair and the pillow were the same color, beneath the wimple of the
medicated cloth she looked like an old nun praying. "Dont put it there
again," she said, without opening her eyes. "That's where you put it before.
Do you want me to have to get out of bed to pick it up?"
 Dilsey reached the book across her and laid it on the broad side of the
bed. "You cant see to read, noways," she said. "You want me to raise de
shade a little?"
 "No. Let them alone. Go on and fix Jason something to eat."
 Dilsey went out. She closed the door and returned to the kitchen. The
stove was almost cold. While she stood there the clock above the cupboard
struck ten times. "One oclock," she said aloud. "Jason aint comin home. Ise
seed de first en de last," she said, looking at the cold stove. "I seed de first
en de last." She set out some cold food on a table. As she moved back and
forth she sang, a hymn. She sang the first two lines over and over to the
complete tune. She arranged the meal and went to the door and called
Luster, and after a time Luster and Ben entered. Ben was still moaning a
little, as to himself.
 "He aint never quit," Luster said.
 "Y'all come on en eat," Dilsey said. "Jason aint comin to dinner." They
sat down at the table. Ben could manage solid food pretty well for himself,
though even now, with cold food before him, Dilsey tied a cloth about his
neck. He and Luster ate. Dilsey moved about the kitchen, singing the two
lines of the hymn which she remembered. "Y'all kin g'awn en eat," she said.
"Jason aint comin home."
 He was twenty miles away at that time. When he left the house he drove
rapidly to town, overreaching the slow sabbath groups and the peremptory
bells along the broken air. He crossed the empty square and turned into a
narrow street that was abruptly quieter even yet, and stopped before a
frame house and went up the flower bordered walk to the porch.
 Beyond the screen door people were talking. As he lifted his hand to
knock he heard steps, so he withheld his hand until a big man in black
broadcloth trousers and a stiff bosomed white shirt without collar opened
the door. He had vigorous untidy iron-gray hair and his gray eyes were
round and shiny like a little boy's. He took Jason's hand and drew him into
the house, still shaking it.
 "Come right in," he said. "Come right in."
 "You ready to go now?" Jason said.
 "Walk right in," the other said, propelling him by the elbow into a room
where a man and a woman sat. "You know Myrtle's husband, dont you?
Jason Compson, Vernon."
 "Yes," Jason said. He did not even look at the man, and as the sheriff
drew a chair across the room the man said,
 "We'll go out so you can talk. Come on, Myrtle."
 "No, no," the sheriff said. "You folks keep your seat. I reckon it aint that
serious, Jason? Have a seat."
 "I'll tell you as we go along," Jason said. "Get your hat and coat."
 "We'll go out," the man said, rising.
 "Keep your seat," the sheriff said. "Me and Jason will go out on the
porch."
 "You get your hat and coat," Jason said. "They've already got a twelve
hour start." The sheriff led the way back to the porch. A man and a woman
passing spoke to him. He responded with a hearty florid gesture. Bells were
still ringing, from the direction of the section known as Nigger Hollow.
"Get your hat, Sheriff," Jason said. The sheriff drew up two chairs.
 "Have a seat and tell me what the trouble is."
 "I told you over the phone," Jason said, standing. "I did that to save
time. Am I going to have to go to law to compel you to do your sworn
duty?"
 "You sit down and tell me about it," the sheriff said. "I'll take care of you
all right."
 "Care, hell," Jason said. "Is this what you call taking care of me?"
 "You're the one that's holding us up," the sheriff said. "You sit down and
tell me about it."
 Jason told him, his sense of injury and impotence feeding upon its own
sound, so that after a time he forgot his haste in the violent cumulation of
his self justification and his outrage. The sheriff watched him steadily with
his cold shiny eyes.
 "But you dont know they done it," he said. "You just think so."
 "Dont know?" Jason said. "When I spent two damn days chasing her
through alleys, trying to keep her away from him, after I told her what I'd
do to her if I ever caught her with him, and you say I dont know that that
little b-- "
 "Now, then," the sheriff said. "That'll do. That's enough of that." He
looked out across the street, his hands in his pockets.
 "And when I come to you, a commissioned officer of the law," Jason
said.
 "That show's in Mottson this week," the sheriff said.
 "Yes," Jason said. "And if I could find a law officer that gave a solitary
damn about protecting the people that elected him to office, I'd be there
too by now." He repeated his story, harshly recapitulant, seeming to get an
actual pleasure out of his outrage and impotence. The sheriff did not
appear to be listening at all.
 "Jason," he said. "What were you doing with three thousand dollars hid
in the house?"
 "What?" Jason said. "That's my business where I keep my money. Your
business is to help me get it back."
 "Did your mother know you had that much on the place?"
 "Look here," Jason said. "My house has been robbed. I know who did it
and I know where they are. I come to you as the commissioned officer of
the law, and I ask you once more, are you going to make any effort to
recover my property, or not?"
 "What do you aim to do with that girl, if you catch them?"
 "Nothing," Jason said. "Not anything. I wouldn't lay my hand on her.
The bitch that cost me a job, the one chance 1 ever had to get ahead, that
killed my father and is shortening my mother's life every day and made my
name a laughing stock in the town. I wont do anything to her," he said.
"Not anything."
 "You drove that girl into running off, Jason," the sheriff said.
 "How I conduct my family is no business of yours," Jason said. "Are you
going to help me or not?"
 "You drove her away from home," the sheriff said. "And I have some
suspicions about who that money belongs to that I dont reckon I'll ever
know for certain."
 Jason stood, slowly wringing the brim of his hat in his hands. He said
quietly: "You're not going to make any effort to catch them for me?"
 "That's not any of my business, Jason. If you had any actual proof, I'd
have to act. But without that I dont figger it's any of my business."
 "That's your answer, is it?" Jason said. "Think well, now."
 "That's it, Jason."
 "All right," Jason said. He put his hat on. "You'll regret this. I wont be
helpless. This is not Russia, where just because he wears a little metal
badge, a man is immune to law." He went down the steps and got in his car
and started the engine. The sheriff watched him drive away, turn, and rush
past the house toward town.
 The bells were ringing again, high in the scudding sunlight in bright
disorderly tatters of sound. He stopped at a filling station and had his tires
examined and the tank filled.
 "Gwine on a trip, is you?" the negro asked him. He didn't answer. "Look
like hit gwine fair off, after all," the negro said.
 "Fair off, hell," Jason said. "It'll be raining like hell by twelve oclock." He
looked at the sky, thinking about rain, about the slick clay roads, himself
stalled somewhere miles from town. He thought about it with a sort of
triumph, of the fact that he was going to miss dinner, that by starting now
and so serving his compulsion of haste, he would be at the greatest possible
distance from both towns when noon came. It seemed to him that in this
circumstance was giving him a break, so he said to the negro:
 "What the hell are you doing? Has somebody paid you to keep this car
standing here as long as you can?"
 "Dis here ti' aint got no air a-tall in hit," the negro said.
 "Then get the hell away from there and let me have that tube," Jason
said.
 "Hit up now," the negro said, rising. "You kin ride now."
 Jason got in and started the engine and drove off. He went into second
gear, the engine spluttering and gasping, and he raced the engine, jamming
the throttle down and snapping the choker in and out savagely. "It's going
to rain," he said. "Get me half way there, and rain like hell." And he drove
on out of the bells and out of town, thinking of himself slogging through
the mud, hunting a team. "And every damn one of them will be at church."
He thought of how he'd find a church at last and take a team and of the
owner coming out, shouting at him and of himself striking the man down.
"I'm Jason Compson. See if you can stop me. See if you can elect a man to
office that can stop me," he said, thinking of himself entering the
courthouse with a file of soldiers and dragging the sheriff out. "Thinks he
can sit with his hands folded and see me lose my job. I'll show him about
jobs." Of his niece he did not think at all, nor of the arbitrary valuation of
the money. Neither of them had had entity or individuality for him for ten
years; together they merely symbolised the job in the bank of which he had
been deprived before he ever got it.
 The air brightened, the running shadow patches were now the obverse,
and it seemed to him that the fact that the day was clearing was another
cunning stroke on the part of the foe, the fresh battle toward which he was
carrying ancient wounds. From time to time he passed churches,
unpainted frame buildings with sheet iron steeples, surrounded by
tethered teams and shabby motorcars, and it seemed to him that each of
them was a picket-post where the rear guards of Circumstance peeped
fleetingly back at him. "And damn You, too," he said. "See if You can stop
me," thinking of himself, his file of soldiers with the manacled sheriff in the
rear, dragging Omnipotence down from his throne, if necessary; of the
embattled legions of both hell and heaven through which he tore his way
and put his hands at last on his fleeing niece.
 The wind was out of the southeast. It blew steadily upon his cheek. It
seemed that he could feel the prolonged blow of it sinking through his
skull, and suddenly with an old premonition he clapped the brakes on and
stopped and sat perfectly still. Then he lifted his hand to his neck and
began to curse, and sat there, cursing in a harsh whisper. When it was
necessary for him to drive for any length of time he fortified himself with a
handkerchief soaked in camphor, which he would tie about his throat when
clear of town, thus inhaling the fumes, and he got out and lifted the seat
cushion on the chance that there might be a forgotten one there. He looked
beneath both seats and stood again for a while, cursing, seeing himself
mocked by his own triumphing. He closed his eyes, leaning on the door. He
could return and get the forgotten camphor, or he could go on. In either
case, his head would be splitting, but at home he could be sure of finding
camphor on Sunday, while if he went on he could not be sure. But if he
went back, he would be an hour and a half later in reaching Mottson.
"Maybe I can drive slow," he said. "Maybe I can drive slow, thinking of
something else...."
 He got in and started. "I'll think of something else," he said, so he
thought about Lorraine. He imagined himself in bed with her, only he was
just lying beside her, pleading with her to help him, then he thought of the
money again, and that he had been outwitted by a woman, a girl. If he
could just believe it was the man who had robbed him. But to have been
robbed of that which was to have compensated him for the lost job, which
he had acquired through so much effort and risk, by the very symbol of the
lost job itself, and worst of all, by a bitch of a girl. He drove on, shielding
his face from the steady wind with the corner of his coat.
 He could see the opposed forces of his destiny and his will drawing
swiftly together now, toward a junction that would be irrevocable; he
became cunning. I cant make a blunder, he told himself. There would be
just one right thing, without alternatives: he must do that. He believed that
both of them would know him on sight, while he'd have to trust to seeing
her first, unless the man still wore the red tie. And the fact that he must
depend on that red tie seemed to be the sum of the impending disaster; he
could almost smell it, feel it above the throbbing of his head.
 He crested the final hill. Smoke lay in the valley, and roofs, a spire or
two above trees. He drove down the hill and into the town, slowing, telling
himself again of the need for caution, to find where the tent was located
first. He could not see very well now, and he knew that it was the disaster
which kept telling him to go directly and get something for his head. At a
filling station they told him that the tent was not up yet, but that the show
cars were on a siding at the station. He drove there.
 Two gaudily painted pullman cars stood on the track. He reconnoitred
them before he got out. He was trying to breathe shallowly, so that the
blood would not beat so in his skull. He got out and went along the station
wall, watching the cars. A few garments hung out of the windows, limp and
crinkled, as though they had been recently laundered. On the earth beside
the steps of one sat three canvas chairs. But he saw no sign of life at all
until a man in a dirty apron came to the door and emptied a pan of
dishwater with a broad gesture, the sunlight glinting on the metal belly of
the pan, then entered the car again.
 Now I'll have to take him by surprise, before he can warn them, he
thought. It never occurred to him that they might not be there, in the car.
That they should not be there, that the whole result should not hinge on
whether he saw them first or they saw him first, would be opposed to all
nature and contrary to the whole rhythm of events. And more than that: he
must see them first, get the money back, then what they did would be of no
importance to him, while otherwise the whole world would know that he,
Jason Compson, had been robbed by Quentin, his niece, a bitch.
 He reconnoitred again. Then he went to the car and mounted the steps,
swiftly and quietly, and paused at the door. The galley was dark, rank with
stale food. The man was a white blur, singing in a cracked, shaky tenor. An
old man, he thought, and not as big as I am. He entered the car as the man
looked up.
 "Hey?" the man said, stopping his song.
 "Where are they?" Jason said. "Quick, now. In the sleeping car?"
 "Where's who?" the man said.
 "Dont lie to me," Jason said. He blundered on in the cluttered
obscurity.
 "What's that?" the other said. "Who you calling a liar?" and when Jason
grasped his shoulder he exclaimed, "Look out, fellow!"
 "Dont lie," Jason said. "Where are they?"
 "Why, you bastard," the man said. His arm was frail and thin in Jason's
grasp. He tried to wrench free, then he turned and fell to scrabbling on the
littered table behind him.
 "Come on," Jason said. "Where are they?"
 "I'll tell you where they are," the man shrieked. "Lemme find my butcher
knife."
 "Here," Jason said, trying to hold the other. "I'm just asking you a
question."
 "You bastard," the other shrieked, scrabbling at the table. Jason tried to
grasp him in both arms, trying to prison the puny fury of him. The man's
body felt so old, so frail, yet so fatally single-purposed that for the first time
Jason saw clear and unshadowed the disaster toward which he rushed.
 "Quit it!" he said. "Here. Here! I'll get out. Give me time, and I'll get
out."
 "Call me a liar," the other wailed. "Lemme go. Lemme go just one
minute. I'll show you."
 Jason glared wildly about, holding the other. Outside it was now bright
and sunny, swift and bright and empty, and he thought of the people soon
to be going quietly home to Sunday dinner, decorously festive, and of
himself trying to hold the fatal, furious little old man whom he dared not
release long enough to turn his back and run.
 "Will you quit long enough for me to get out?" he said. "Will you?" But
the other still struggled, and Jason freed one hand and struck him on the
head. A clumsy, hurried blow, and not hard, but the other slumped
immediately and slid clattering among pans and buckets to the floor. Jason
stood above him, panting, listening. Then he turned and ran from the car.
At the door he restrained himself and descended more slowly and stood
there again. His breath made a hah hah hah sound and he stood there
trying to repress it, darting his gaze this way and that, when at a scuffling
sound behind him he turned in time to see the little old man leaping
awkwardly and furiously from the vestibule, a rusty hatchet high in his
hand.
 He grasped at the hatchet, feeling no shock but knowing that he was
falling, thinking So this is how it'll end, and he believed that he was about
to die and when something crashed against the back of his head he thought
How did he hit me there? Only maybe he hit me a long time ago, he
thought, And I just now felt it, and he thought Hurry. Hurry. Get it over
with, and then a furious desire not to die seized him and he struggled,
hearing the old man wailing and cursing in his cracked voice.
 He still struggled when they hauled him to his feet, but they held him
and he ceased.
 "Am I bleeding much?" he said. "The back of my head. Am I bleeding?"
He was still saying that while he felt himself being propelled rapidly away,
heard the old man's thin furious voice dying away behind him. "Look at my
head," he said. "Wait, I'--"
 "Wait, hell," the man who held him said. "That damn little wasp'll kill
you. Keep going. You aint hurt."
 "He hit me," Jason said. "Am I bleeding?"
 "Keep going," the other said. He led Jason on around the corner of the
station, to the empty platform where an express truck stood, where grass
grew rigidly in a plot bordered with rigid flowers and a sign in electric
lights: Keep your on Mottson, the gap filled by a human eye with an
electric pupil. The man released him.
 "Now," he said. "You get on out of here and stay out. What were you
trying to do? commit suicide?"
 "I was looking for two people," Jason said. "I just asked him where they
were."
 "Who you looking for?"
 "It's a girl," Jason said. "And a man. He had on a red tie in Jefferson
yesterday. With this show. They robbed me."
 "Oh," the man said. "You're the one, are you. Well, they aint here."
 "I reckon so," Jason said. He leaned against the wall and put his hand to
the back of his head and looked at his palm. "I thought I was bleeding," he
said. "I thought he hit me with that hatchet."
 "You hit your head on the rail," the man said. "You better go on. They
aint here."
 "Yes. He said they were not here. I thought he was lying."
 "Do you think I'm lying?" the man said.
 "No," Jason said. "I know they're not here."
 "I told him to get the hell out of there, both of them," the man said. "I
wont have nothing like that in my show. I run a respectable show, with a
respectable troupe."
 "Yes," Jason said. "You dont know where they went?"
 "No. And I dont want to know. No member of my show can pull a stunt
like that. You her ... brother?"
 "No," Jason said. "It dont matter. I just wanted to see them. You sure he
didn't hit me? No blood, I mean."
 "There would have been blood if I hadn't got there when I did. You stay
away from here, now. That little bastard'll kill you. That your car yonder?"
 "Yes."
 "Well, you get in it and go back to Jefferson. If you find them, it wont be
in my show. I run a respectable show. You say they robbed you?"
 "No," Jason said. "It dont make any difference." He went to the car and
got in. What is it I must do? he thought. Then he remembered. He started
the engine and drove slowly up the street until he found a drugstore. The
door was locked. He stood for a while with his hand on the knob and his
head bent a little. Then he turned away and when a man came along after a
while he asked if there was a drugstore open anywhere, but there was not.
Then he asked when the northbound train ran, and the man told him at
two thirty. He crossed the pavement and got in the car again and sat there.
After a while two negro lads passed. He called to them.
 "Can either of you boys drive a car?"
 "Yes, suh."
 "What'll you charge to drive me to Jefferson right away?"
 They looked at one another, murmuring.
 "I'll pay a dollar," Jason said.
 They murmured again. "Couldn't go fer dat," one said. "What will you go
for?"
 "Kin you go?" one said.
 "I cant git off," the other said. "Whyn't you drive him up dar? You aint
got nothin to do."
 "Yes I is."
 "Whut you got to do?"
 They murmured again, laughing.
 "I'll give you two dollars," Jason said. "Either of you." "I cant git away
neither," the first said.
 "All right," Jason said. "Go on."
 He sat there for some time. He heard a clock strike the half hour, then
people began to pass, in Sunday and easter clothes. Some looked at him as
they passed, at the man sitting quietly behind the wheel of a small car, with
his invisible life ravelled out about him like a wornout sock, and went on.
After a while a negro in overalls came up.
 "Is you de one wants to go to Jefferson?" he said.
 "Yes," Jason said. "What'll you charge me?"
 "Fo dollars."
 "Give you two."
 "Cant go fer no less'n fo." The man in the car sat quietly. He wasn't even
looking at him. The negro said, "You want me er not?"
 "All right," Jason said. "Get in.
 He moved over and the negro took the wheel. Jason closed his eyes. I
can get something for it at Jefferson, he told himself, easing himself to the
jolting, I can get something there. They drove on, along the streets where
people were turning peacefully into houses and Sunday dinners, and on out
of town. He thought that. He wasn't thinking of home, where Ben and
Luster were eating cold dinner at the kitchen table. Something--the
absence of disaster, threat, in any constant evil--permitted him to forget
Jefferson as any place which he had ever seen before, where his life must
resume itself.
 When Ben and Luster were done Dilsey sent them outdoors. "And see
kin you let him alone swell fo oclock. T. P. be here den."
 "Yessum," Luster said. They went out. Dilsey ate her dinner and cleared
up the kitchen. Then she went to the foot of the stairs and listened, but
there was no sound. She returned through the kitchen and out the outer
door and stopped on the steps. Ben and Luster were not in sight, but while
she stood there she heard another sluggish twang from the direction of the
cellar door and she went to the door and looked down upon a repetition of
the morning's scene.
 "He done hit jes dat way," Luster said. He contemplated the motionless
saw with a kind of hopeful dejection. "I aint got de right thing to hit it wid
yit," he said.
 "En you aint gwine find hit down here, neither," Dilsey said. "You take
him on out in de sun. You bofe get pneumonia down here on dis wet flo."
 She waited and watched them cross the yard toward a clump of cedar
trees near the fence. Then she went on to her cabin.
 "Now, dont you git started," Luster said. "I had enough trouble wid you
today." There was a hammock made of barrel staves slatted into woven
wires. Luster lay down in the swing, but Ben went on vaguely and
purposelessly. He began to whimper again. "Hush, now," Luster said. "I
fixin to whup you." He lay back in the swing. Ben had stopped moving, but
Luster could hear him whimpering. "Is you gwine hush, er aint you?"
Luster said. He got up and followed and came upon Ben squatting before a
small mound of earth. At either end of it an empty bottle of blue glass that
once contained poison was fixed in the ground. In one was a withered stalk
of jimson weed. Ben squatted before it, moaning, a slow, inarticulate
sound. Still moaning he sought vaguely about and found a twig and put it
in the other bottle. "Whyn't you hush?" Luster said. "You want me to give
you somethin to sho nough moan about? Sposin I does dis." He knelt and
swept the bottle suddenly up and behind him. Ben ceased moaning. He
squatted, looking at the small depression where the bottle had sat, then as
he drew his lungs full Luster brought the bottle back into view. "Hush!" he
hissed. "Dont you dast to beller! Dont you. Dar hit is. See? Here. You fixin
to start ef you stays here. Come on, les go see ef dey started knockin ball
yit." He took Ben's arm and drew him up and they went to the fence and
stood side by side there, peering between the matted honeysuckle not yet
in bloom.
 "Dar," Luster said. "Dar come some. See um?"
 They watched the foursome play onto the green and out, and move to
the tee and drive. Ben watched, whimpering, slobbering. When the
foursome went on he followed along the fence, bobbing and moaning. One
said,
 "Here, caddie. Bring the bag."
 "Hush, Benjy," Luster said, but Ben went on at his shambling trot,
clinging to the fence, wailing in his hoarse, hopeless voice. The man played
and went on, Ben keeping pace with him until the fence turned at right
angles, and he clung to the fence, watching the people move on and away.
 "Will you hush now?" Luster said. "Will you hush now?" He shook Ben's
arm. Ben clung to the fence, wailing steadily and hoarsely. "Aint you gwine
stop?" Luster said. "Or is you?" Ben gazed through the fence. "All right,
den," Luster said. "You want somethin to belier about?" He looked over his
shoulder, toward the house. Then he whispered: "Caddy! Beller now.
"Caddy! "Caddy! "Caddy!
 A moment later, in the slow intervals of Ben's voice, Luster heard Dilsey
calling. He took Ben by the arm and they crossed the yard toward her.
 "I tole you he warnt gwine stay quiet," Luster said.
 "You vilyun!" Dilsey said. "Whut you done to him?"
 "I aint done nothin. I tole you when dem folks start playin, he git started
up."
 "You come on here," Dilsey said. "Hush, Benjy. Hush, now." But he
wouldn't hush. They crossed the yard quickly and went to the cabin and
entered. "Run git dat shoe," Dilsey said. "Dont you sturb Miss Cahline,
now. Ef she say anything, tell her I got him. Go on, now; you kin sho do dat
right, I reckon." Luster went out. Dilsey led Ben to the bed and drew him
down beside her and she held him, rocking back and forth, wiping his
drooling mouth upon the hem of her skirt. "Hush, now," she said, stroking
his head. "Hush. Dilsey got you." But he bellowed slowly, abjectly, without
tears; the grave hopeless sound of all voiceless misery under the sun.
Luster returned, carrying a white satin slipper. It was yellow now, and
cracked, and soiled, and when they gave it into Ben's hand he hushed for a
while. But he still whimpered, and soon he lifted his voice again.
 "You reckon you kin find T. P.?" Dilsey said.
 "He say yistiddy he gwine out to St John's today. Say he be back at fo."
 Dilsey rocked back and forth, stroking Ben's head.
 "Dis long time, O Jesus," she said. "Dis long time."
 "I kin drive dat surrey, mammy," Luster said.
 "You kill bofe y'all," Dilsey said. "You do hit fer devilment. I knows you
got plenty sense to. But I cant trust you. Hush, now," she said. "Hush.
Hush."
 "Nome I wont," Luster said. "I drives wid T. P." Dilsey rocked back and
forth, holding Ben. "Miss Cahline say ef you cant quiet him, she gwine git
up en come down en do hit."
 "Hush, honey," Dilsey said, stroking Ben's head. "Luster, honey," she
said. "Will you think about yo ole mammy en drive dat surrey right?"
 "Yessum," Luster said. "I drive hit jes like T. P."
 Dilsey stroked Ben's head, rocking back and forth. "I does de tees I kin,"
she said. "Lewd knows dat. Go git it, den," she said, rising. Luster scuttled
out. Ben held the slipper, crying. "Hush, now. Luster gone to git de surrey
en take you to de graveyard. We aint gwine risk gittin yo cap," she said. She
went to a closet contrived of a calico curtain hung across a corner of the
room and got the felt hat she had worn. "We's down to worse'n dis, ef folks
jes knowed," she said. "You's de Lawd's chile anyway. En I be His'n too, fo
long, praise Jesus. Here." She put the hat on his head and buttoned his
coat. He wailed steadily. She took the slipper from him and put it away and
they went out. Luster came up, with an ancient white horse in a battered
and lopsided surrey.
 "You gwine be careful, Luster?" she said.
 "Yessum," Luster said. She helped Ben into the back seat. He had ceased
crying, but now he began to whimper again.
 "Hit's his flower," Luster said. "Wait, I'll git him one."
 "You set right dar," Dilsey said. She went and took the cheekstrap.
"Now, hurry en git him one." Luster ran around the house, toward the
garden. He came back with a single narcissus.
 "Dat un broke," Dilsey said. "Whyn't you git him a good un?"
 "Hit de onliest one I could find," Luster said. "Y'all took all of um Friday
to dec'rate de church. Wait, I'll fix hit." So while Dilsey held the horse
Luster put a splint on the flower stalk with a twig and two bits of string and
gave it to Ben. Then he mounted and took the reins. Dilsey still held the
bridle.
 "You knows de way now?" she said. "Up de street, round de square, to de
graveyard, den straight back home."
 "Yessum," Luster said. "Hum up, Queenie."
 "You gwine be careful, now?"
 "Yessum." Dilsey released the bridle.
 "Hum up, Queenie," Luster said.
 "Here," Dilsey said. "You hen me dat whup."
 "Aw, mammy," Luster said.
 "Give hit here," Dilsey said, approaching the wheel. Luster gave it to her
reluctantly.
 "I wont never git Queenie started now."
 "Never you mind about dat," Dilsey said. "Queenie know mo bout whar
she gwine den you does. All you got to do es set dar en hold dem reins. You
knows de way, now?"
 "Yessum. Same way T. P. goes ev'y Sunday."
 "Den you do de same thing dis Sunday."
 "Cose I is. Aint I drove fer T. P. mo'n a hund'ed times?"
 "Den do hit again," Dilsey said. "G'awn, now. En ef you hurts Benjy,
nigger boy, I dont know whut I do. You bound fer de chain gang, but I'll
send you dar fo even chain gang ready fer you."
 "Yessum," Luster said. "Hum up, Queenie."
 He flapped the lines on Queenie's broad back and the surrey lurched
into motion.
 "You; Luster!" Dilsey said.
 "Hum up, dar!" Luster said. He flapped the lines again. With
subterranean rumblings Queenie jogged slowly down the drive and turned
into the street, where Luster exhorted her into a gait resembling a
prolonged and suspended fall in a forward direction.
 Ben quit whimpering. He sat in the middle of the seat, holding the
repaired flower upright in his fist, his eyes serene and ineffable. Directly
before him Luster's bullet head turned backward continually until the
house passed from view, then he pulled to the side of the street and while
Ben watched him he descended and broke a switch from a hedge. Queenie
lowered her head and fell to cropping the grass until Luster mounted and
hauled her head up and harried her into motion again, then he squared his
elbows and with the switch and the reins held high he assumed a
swaggering attitude out of all proportion to the sedate cropping of
Queenie's hooves and the organlike basso of her internal accompaniment.
Motors passed them, and pedestrians; once a group of half grown
negroes:
 "Dar Luster. Whar you gwine Luster? To de boneyard?"
 "Hi," Luster said. "Aint de same boneyard y'all headed fen Hum up,
elefump."
 They approached the square, where the Confederate soldier gazed with
empty eyes beneath his marble hand in wind and weather. Luster took still
another notch in himself and gave the impervious Queenie a cut with the
switch, casting his glance about the square. "Dar Mr Jason car," he said,
then he spied another group of negroes. "Les show dem niggers how
quality does, Benjy," he said.
 "Whut you say?" He looked back. Ben sat, holding the flower in his fist,
his gaze empty and untroubled. Luster hit Queenie again and swung her to
the left at the monument.
 For an instant Ben sat in an utter hiatus. Then he bellowed. Bellow on
bellow, his voice mounted, with scarce interval for breath. There was more
than astonishment in it, it was horror; shock; agony eyeless, tongueless;
just sound, and Luster's eyes backrolling for a white instant. "Gret God," he
said. "Hush! Hush! Gret God!" He whirled again and struck Queenie with
the switch. It broke and he cast it away and with Ben's voice mounting
toward its unbelievable crescendo Luster caught up the end of the reins
and leaned forward as Jason came jumping across the square and onto the
step.
 With a backhanded blow he hurled Luster aside and caught the reins
and sawed Queenie about and doubled the reins back and slashed her
across the hips. He cut her again and again, into a plunging gallop, while
Ben's hoarse agony roared about them, and swung her about to the right of
the monument. Then he struck Luster over the head with his fist.
 "Dont you know any better than to take him to the left?" he said. He
reached back and struck Ben, breaking the flower stalk again. "Shut up!" he
said. "Shut up!" He jerked Queenie back and jumped down. "Get to hell on
home with him. If you ever cross that gate with him again, I'll kill you!"
 "Yes, suh!" Luster said. He took the reins and hit Queenie with the end
of them. "Git up! Git up, dar! Benjy, fer God's sake!"
 Ben's voice roared and roared. Queenie moved again, her feet began to
clop-clop steadily again, and at once Ben hushed. Luster looked quickly
back over his shoulder, then he drove on. The broken flower drooped over
Ben's fist and his eyes were empty and blue and serene again as cornice
and fa&ccirc;ade flowed smoothly once more from left to right, post and
t
ree, window and doorway and signboard each in its ordered place.
New York, N.Y.
October 1928
